ID: A01
DOI: 10.1007/s11023-017-9445-2
中文译名: 信息时代死亡的政治经济学：对数字来生产业的批判性研究
英文原题: The Political Economy of Death in the Age of Information: A Critical Approach to the Digital Afterlife Industry
原文件: 文献全文/正文/A01_2017_信息时代死亡的政治经济学：对数字来生产业的批判性研究__The Political Economy of Death in the Age of Information A Critical Approach to the Digital Afterlife Ind….pdf
源URL: http://link.springer.com/content/pdf/10.1007/s11023-017-9445-2.pdf
提取说明: 仅为机械文本提取，页码标记依原PDF；不代表已完成论证核验。


===== PAGE 1 =====

The Political Economy of Death in the Age
of Information: A Critical Approach to the Digital
Afterlife Industry
Carl O¨ hman1
• Luciano Floridi1,2
Received: 24 May 2017 / Accepted: 22 August 2017 / Published online: 7 September 2017
 The Author(s) 2017. This article is an open access publication
Abstract Online technologies enable vast amounts of data to outlive their pro-
ducers online, thereby giving rise to a new, digital form of afterlife presence.
Although researchers have begun investigating the nature of such presence, aca-
demic literature has until now failed to acknowledge the role of commercial
interests in shaping it. The goal of this paper is to analyse what those interests are
and what ethical consequences they may have. This goal is pursued in three steps.
First, we introduce the concept of the Digital Afterlife Industry (DAI), and deﬁne it
as an object of study. Second, we identify the politico-economic interests of the
DAI. For this purpose, we develop an analytical approach based on an informational
interpretation of Marxian economics. Third, we explain the practical manifestations
of the interests using four real life cases. The ﬁndings expose the incentives of the
DAI to alter what is referred to as the ‘‘informational bodies’’ of the dead, which in
turn is to be seen as a violation of the principle of human dignity. To prevent such
consequences, we argue that the ethical conventions that guide trade with remains of
organic bodies may serve as a good model for future regulation of DAI.
Keywords Digital Afterlife Industry  Death  Political economy  Philosophy
of information  Human dignity  Karl Marx
& Carl O¨ hman
carl.j.ohman@gmail.com
1
Oxford Internet Institute, University of Oxford, 1 St Giles, Oxford OX1 3JS, UK
2
Alan Turing Institute, 96 Euston Road, London NW1 2DB, UK
123
Minds & Machines (2017) 27:639–662
https://doi.org/10.1007/s11023-017-9445-2


===== PAGE 2 =====

1 Introduction
The dead are becoming increasingly present in cyber space. For example, in 2012
the number of ‘‘dead’’ proﬁles on Facebook was estimated to be increasing at a rate
of 19,000 daily (Death Reference Desk 2012). Sometime by the end of the century,
depending on Facebook’s user growth rate, the dead proﬁles are even expected to
exceed the number of living user proﬁles (Brown 2016), thereby creating a form of
‘‘digital graveyard’’ (Ambrosino 2016). This development opens up new opportu-
nities for commercial enterprises to monetise the digital afterlife of departed
Internet users. But it also poses some severe challenges regarding the ethical status
of such data.
Despite a growing body of academic literature on the phenomenon of digital
afterlife (Graham et al. 2013), its economic and ethical aspects have hitherto drawn
little attention. In particular, there is a lack of critical economic approaches in the
literature (Meese et al. 2015, 416). Both sociological (Mitchell et al. 2012; Walter
2015) and legal studies (Mayer-Scho¨nberger 2009; McCallig 2013) have mainly
focused on cultural and social practices regarding death online. In doing so, they
merely account for the role of technology and have thus left economics and ethics
relatively unexplored. At the same time, purely ethical viewpoints (Stokes 2012;
Wright 2014), although enlightening, often fail to situate the matter within a larger
economic and political context. As a result, current research on digital afterlife tends
to neglect the fact that the online presence of the dead is generally mediated by
commercial platforms.
In this article, we provide a deeper empirical and theoretical understanding of
death online by introducing the concept of the Digital Afterlife Industry (DAI) as an
umbrella term for ﬁrms that commercialise the digital remains [term used by Lingel
(2013)] of deceased Internet users. The DAI includes a wide range of actors: from
small start-up applications, like Afternote and Departing.com, to technology giants,
like Facebook and Google. It is reasonable to assume that the economic interests of
such ﬁrms may play a part in shaping the nature of the online presence of the dead
(Karppi 2013). For this reason we set out to investigate those interests, as well as
their ethical consequences, by asking the following questions:
1.
What is the DAI and what types of services are operating within it?
2.
What are the political and economic interests of the DAI, and what ethically
undesirable consequences may arise from them?
3.
How do these interests manifest themselves in practice?
These questions are posed from what one may refer to as an infra-ethical
perspective (Floridi 2013a, b). That is, they address the intersection of ethics and
design. Answering them should put us in a better position to design social and
economic infrastructures as a response to the undesirable consequences that are
identiﬁed in this article.
640
C. O¨ hman, L. Floridi
123


===== PAGE 3 =====

2 The Emergence of an Industry
Commercial enterprises were among the ﬁrst to recognise the challenges and
opportunities brought about by the increasing numbers of dead Internet users. At
ﬁrst, dealing with dead users appeared to pose a problem for businesses (McCallig
2013, 11), but this soon gave rise to the development of a number of innovative
services. In 2009, for example, Facebook began to allow bereaved family members
to turn the proﬁles of their lost ones into memorial sites, spaces to meet, mourn, and
collectively ‘‘keep in touch’’ with the deceased (Facebook 2016). Similarly, Google
launched what they call an inactive account manager, which automatically informs
the user’s network about his/her death. In addition to the technology giants, a
plethora of start-up companies are starting to exploit the ‘‘business’’ of death online
(see ‘‘Appendix’’ for an overview). Regardless of their niche and size, such ﬁrms
mark the beginning of an increased commercialisation of afterlife existence. As put
by venture capitalist Dave Balter (Balter in Engel 2015), the ‘‘death industry’’ has
become ‘‘ripe for disruption’’.
Because of its novelty, and despite the signiﬁcance and magnitude of the issue,
very little is currently known about the industry in terms of economics. For instance,
in Graham et al.’s (2013) introduction to the special issue on the Death, Afterlife
and Immortality of Bodies and Data in The Information Society, the economic
perspective is almost entirely absent. While some, such as Aceti (2015, 7) has
touched upon the connection between digital afterlife and capitalism, only two
recent studies investigate the economics of digital afterlife explicitly: Karppi (2013)
and Meese et al. (2015).
Karppi (2013) argues that social media sites are incentivised to keep dead users’
information within their data economy rather than deleting it. Taking Facebook as
his primary example, he further (2013, 14) claims that in the ‘‘noopolitics’’ of the
site, the dead become ‘‘nodes that open up to other notes and other agencies’’ in a
networked economy. Furthermore, he states that the position of the dead as nodes
‘‘thingiﬁes’’ them and is argued to be the reason behind Facebook’s decision to
memorialise proﬁles rather than deleting them (Karppi 2013, 14).
On a similar note, Meese et al. (2015) speaks of an increasingly commercialised
discourse of death in social media, arguing that this causes a ‘‘commercial and
social push for the preservation of posthumous personhood’’ (Meese et al. 2015,
416). Mainly, this is suggested to be a discursive matter linked to the social
mechanisms of social media at large. Despite touching upon the topic of political
economy, neither Karppi, nor Meese et al. directly address the ethical dimension of
the matter, nor do they acknowledge the industrial nature of digital afterlife
existence of today, for which we account in the following pages.
2.1 Death and Online Celebrity Culture
Celebrity culture provides a valuable antecedent to the commercialisation of digital
remains. Depending on the available ICT (Information and Communication
Technology), the dead have always been able to remain present in society (Walter
The Political Economy of Death in the Age of Information…
641
123


===== PAGE 4 =====

2015). The book, for instance, allowed previous generations to sustain so called
‘‘para-social’’ (Sherlock 2013, 168; Horton and Wohl 2006) relationships with
historical ﬁgures like Jesus Christ or Mohammed the Prophet. However, the digital
ICTs of today magnify the phenomenon immensely, not just in terms of the number
of people involved, but also because they allow for much larger quantities and
different kinds of information to outlive its producer. It thus gives rise to new forms
of presence of, and communication with, the departed (for instance, the deaths of
David Bowie and Prince), especially in terms of communal mourning and
memorials (Church 2013).
The industrial commercialisation of the afterlife is a well-known phenomenon
(Neate 2014; Sherlock 2013) within studies of celebrity culture. Celebrities may
indeed continue to be proﬁtable after their death. According to Forbes (2015), an
artist like Michael Jackson has, for example, ‘‘made’’ more than $140 m since his
death in 2009. Likewise, John Lennon has posthumously made $12 m and Albert
Einstein $11 m. Clearly, in a world where everything is data, a person may outlive
the death of his/her organic body, as argued by the philosopher Patrick Stokes
(2012).
2.2 Social Media Users as Micro Celebrities
Digital and social media do not simply change the way celebrities are mourned and
made present in society. As compellingly argued by Marwick (2013), they allow
anyone with a computer to employ celebrity like strategies of communication.
Subsequently, it can be argued that what was previously a celebrity privilege, to
have an audience and a recorded life, has become democratised. This also implies
that as social network users leave their information behind online when passing
away, the kind of informational afterlife existence that was previously reserved for
celebrities are now also becoming increasingly available to the general public
(Walter 2015).
As has been the case with celebrity royalties and copyright, legal conﬂicts have
also begun to appear over the informational assets left behind by ordinary Internet
users (O’Brien 2015; Wright 2014; Lingel 2013). Since most user generated content
is co-owned by the platform on which it is stored,1 Internet corporations often get
full rights to user information upon the event of death (O’Brien 2015). This causes
situations that closely resemble the typical conﬂict between record labels and family
members of deceased music artists. Digital policy scholars have therefore
repeatedly highlighted the alarming lack of legislation needed to address the
conﬂict over data heritage (Carroll et al. 2015; Laouris 2015; McCallig 2013;
Mayer-Scho¨nberger 2009). In most countries, courts have no speciﬁc instructions
regarding the issue, and therefore no guidelines to follow when endeavouring to
reach a decision. The only exceptions can be found in the United States, where
initiatives are currently being developed to create a federal standard (Carrol 2015).
1 For instance, Facebook owns all the information one has produced on the platform. Similarly, Google
owns one’s entire search history.
642
C. O¨ hman, L. Floridi
123


===== PAGE 5 =====

Apart from the legal issues, digital technology has also (as in the case of celebrities)
given rise to new practices of grief (Brubaker et al. Brubaker et al. 2013; Kern et al.
2013) and even a societal reconceptualization of death itself (Sherlock 2013). For
example, Mitchell et al. (2012) found that parents who create online memorial sites for
their deceased children often keep the communication going for years after the child’s
death, indicating that even small pieces of information may function as surrogate for
the deceased. Mitchell et al. (2012) explain this phenomenon as a result of the unique
affordances of online technologies, in which the deceased may appear almost as if still
alive, and they do subsequently warn against over usage of online memorials.
Similarly, Stokes (2012) uses Floridian (2013) ethics to show that such data deserves
to be treated as a moral patient in itself.
Despite the pressing nature of the issue, Internet users have, according to a study
by Grimm and Chiasson (2014), paid little attention to questions of their digital
afterlife. However, when asked, users are signiﬁcantly more positive about having
their data managed by non-proﬁt organisations than corporate business (Grimm and
Chiasson 2014, 7). Furthermore, a majority of users even prefer their information to
be destroyed after dying (Grimm and Chiasson 2014, 7), an option strongly
advocated by law scholar Victor Mayer Scho¨nberger in his Delete: the virtue of
forgetting the digital age (2009).
Commercialism is clearly a concern for consumers, and yet, nearly every aspect
of death online is imbued with it. Matters of communal grief, as well as
management of digital assets and the ethical and ontological status of digital
remains are all concerns that are related to phenomena observable on, and therefore
inﬂuenced by, commercial platforms. Despite this common denominator, there is
yet no systematic analysis of the economic aspects characterising the phenomenon.
In order to understand the dynamics of digital afterlife fully, an economic approach
is therefore an essential building block. To begin structuring such an approach, the
industry ﬁrst needs to be mapped out.
3 The Digital Afterlife Industry as an Object of Study
In contrast to previous literature, we regard commercialization of digital afterlife as a
speciﬁc object of study in itself. We shall refer to it as the Digital Afterlife Industry
(DAI), an umbrella neologism that covers commercial enterprises that monetize death
online. We deﬁne the DAI using three necessary and sufﬁcient criteria.
The ﬁrst criterion is production. In order to be classiﬁed as an industry, some
form of good or service needs to be produced. Thus, the DAI only refers to activities
of production, which distinguishes it from activities without a productive outcome
such as private, unrecorded grief.
The second criterion is commercialism. Firms operating within the DAI produce
goods, services or experiences (such as grief or closure) for the purpose of making
proﬁt, dealing with what they produce as commodities.2 This excludes non-proﬁt
2 As deﬁned by Marx (1867/2015, 27), a commodity is (contrary to other forms of goods) an object or a
service that is produced for commercial purposes.
The Political Economy of Death in the Age of Information…
643
123


===== PAGE 6 =====

activities such as religious communities and self-made memorial sites, and also
charities that, despite being productive (ﬁrst criterion), do not make proﬁt.
The third and last criterion is online usage of digital human remains. This refers
to any informational content left by the deceased online, and distinguishes the DAI
from three other types of industries: (1) commercialisation of physical funerals and
ofﬂine digital activities, such as recorded audio messages and shifting images on
tombstones; (2) biological immortality projects that enhance the durability of the
organic body; and (3) businesses that deal with digital remains of non-human
animals. Given the three suggested criteria, the DAI can be formally deﬁned thus:
DAI ¼def: any activity of production of commercial goods or services
ð
Þ
that involves online usage of digital remains:
On a practical/concrete level, ‘‘usage’’ simply refers to the speciﬁc aspect of digital
afterlife that is addressed by a service, to whom the product is sold, and the need,
which it is meant to fulﬁl. On a more abstract level, ‘‘usage’’ rather refers to the role
of digital remains in the production process, which remains invariant as technology
develops. While the latter is crucial for identifying the general interests of the
industry, the next subsection focuses solely on the former, the practice of using
digital remains.
3.1 Organising Services Within the DAI
There have been previous attempts to put services within various categories (Foot
et al. 2005), but these are almost exclusively with regards to memorial sites.
Comprehensive and systematic categorizations of the ﬁrms operating within the
industry are thus rare, even if tutorials on the variety of services exist (Meese et al.
2015). As far as academic literature goes, the only systematic attempt to categorise
different digital afterlife services is a short conference paper written by de Oliveira
et al. (2015). Despite lacking a clear deﬁnition of the industry, the paper suggests
four types of services: (A) Messaging Services, (B) Online Memorials, (C) Digital
Heritage Management, and (D) Data Mining.3 While appearing intuitively accurate,
these types lack empirical grounding as the authors do not present any methodology
nor the process of producing the types. They are therefore difﬁcult to operationalize
and lack strict deﬁnitions. To obtain a more rigorous taxonomy, a systematic re-
examination of the industry is necessary.
To ground the categorization in empirical data, we collected information about
an initial list of 57 different ﬁrms4 using three main sources: (1) the list provided by
the digital afterlife blog Thedigitalbeyond.com; (2) the list used in de Oliviera’s
study; and (3) the top 50 hits on Google with the search terms ‘‘digital afterlife
service’’. The ﬁrms were then organized in a three-step procedure, with focus on the
product offered to the users.
3 Our translation from Portuguese.
4 For a more detailed illustration of the procedure, see ‘‘Appendix’’.
644
C. O¨ hman, L. Floridi
123


===== PAGE 7 =====

First, another layer was added to the initial list of ﬁrms, which consisted of a short
summary of the product/service offered by each ﬁrm. As some ﬁrms offer more than
one service, the total number of services/products offered numbered 72. Second, the
72 products/services were merged into 14 more general groups with regards their
character. For example, all services providing some kind of posthumous emailing
(regardless of price and product design) were merged into one particular group,
deﬁned as ‘‘Posthumous emailing’’, as were services that in some way keep the user’s
proﬁle posting on social media (‘‘Posthumous Social Media Messaging’’). The third
step collapsed the 14 categories into four broad types: (A) Information Management
Services, (B) Online Memorial Services, (C) Posthumous Messaging Services and
(D) Re-creation Services. For example, groups involving emailing, continuous social
media presence and posthumous video communication were collapsed into the
broader type ‘‘Posthumous Messaging Services’’. While the outcome of this procedure
largely overlaps with the types suggested by de Oliveira et al. (2015), the new
deﬁnitions are more precise. They are also arrived to through a fully transparent
process using empirical data (see ‘‘Appendix’’).
(A)
Information Management Services
Deﬁnition
Services that help users deal with problems regarding digital asset
management that may arise as a consequence of their own or someone else’s death.
Information management services create a form of digital will for their users, and
ensure that assets are passed on (or destroyed) upon the event of death. Such services are
typically delivered by small start-up companies like Everplans or Passwordbox.com.
However,asGooglerecentlyintroducedtheir ‘‘inactive accountmanager’’ option,many
of the less advanced ﬁrms have become rather obsolete. At the same time, Google’s
entry to the business increases the importance of the market as a whole, as it becomes a
part of the Gmail package, used by more than 1 billion people globally (Miller 2016).
Google’s entry also makes it difﬁcult to estimate the amount of capital that is being
invested in the Information Management market, especially since their services are
technically ‘‘free’’. Yet, a report released by the online security company McAfee
(Smith 2011) showed that people on average put a value of $37,000 on their digital
assets ($55,000 for Americans). This certainly indicates that there is proﬁt to be made.
Recent investments are pointing in the same direction; in 2014, Everplans received
$3.45 m in venture capital, likewise the venture capitalists OMERS Venture has since
invested $6 m in the platform Passwordbox, to mention only a few.
(B)
Posthumous Messaging Services
Deﬁnition
Services that, upon the death of the user, deliver online messages or
other digital communicative content to appointed recipients.
The typical service sends out a message to the users, which—if unanswered—
triggers a number of messages and/or other forms of digital content to be sent out to
a certain number of people. Many ﬁrms that offer posthumous messaging combine it
The Political Economy of Death in the Age of Information…
645
123


===== PAGE 8 =====

with some form of Information Management. It can be seen as a form of social
insurance that one’s last wishes and secrets will be passed down after one dies. In
contrast to the Information Management Services, this kind of service has not been
adapted by any of the mainstream ﬁrms. Whereas one or two messages are often
free, almost every site has a premium version that varies in prices from $10 to 50 per
year, according to our investigation.
(C)
Online Memorial Services
Deﬁnition
Services that provide an online space for a deceased individual or
group to be mourned and/or remembered.
Sites often include features such as logs and other forms of communication
channels where the bereaved can mourn together as well as interact with the digital
remains of the deceased. Users (bereaved friends and family) often upload photos,
videos and other forms of informational entities, which functions as a form of digital
grave. This kind of service is typically delivered by a start-up with around 50,000
users. Many services advertise themselves as free, but almost without exception there
is some form of paid ‘‘premium’’ version. Similar to Google’s entry to the
Information Management Services, memorial start-ups are competing with Face-
book, which currently hosts a vast majority of online memorials (despite the fact that
memorials are not Facebook’s primary purpose). As there are 1.65 billion current
users who are yet to die, Facebook-memorials are facing a prosperous future.
(D)
Re-creation Services
Deﬁnition
Services that use personal data in order to generate new content
replicating a dead person’s social behaviour.
Re-creation services are sites that assemble digital remains in order to re-create
the personality of the deceased. In contrast to simple messaging services, they do
not just post previously produced data, but actually generate new messages based on
one’s online behavioural patterns. The SNS (Social Networking Site) Eter9 for
example, uses Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AI) to create a virtual duplicate of the user,
which is active in his or her absence. Unlike the other types, this kind of feature has
(for obvious reasons) not been adapted by the main stream technology giants.
Similar to the previous types, Re-creation Services are typically provided by an
(often unstable) start-up company. The ﬁrst commercial project Virtual Eternity was
founded in 2012, but soon went out of business as they only managed to attract
about 10,000 users. Lately, ﬁrms that are more successful have begun to emerge; for
example, Eter9 has managed to increase its user base from 7 to 50 thousands during
the last 6 months (at the time of writing). Similarly, MIT start-up Eterni.me has
currently about 33,000 beta-subscriber.
Until now, the kind of systematic mapping and deﬁnition of the industry that is
outlined above has been largely missing from academic literature. As pointed out
before, the services are only described from the perspective of their usage of digital
646
C. O¨ hman, L. Floridi
123


===== PAGE 9 =====

remains in a very concrete sense. To identify the general economic interests of the
industry, one needs to consider the conceptual level too.
4 Outlining a Critical Approach
When addressing the general economic mechanisms of the industry, one cannot
solely rely on empirical data, which is tied merely to the current ﬁrms on the
market. Instead, our analysis addresses the economics of the phenomenon on a
conceptual level. That is, it investigates what is independent of the current market.
In order to describe the basic interests of the DAI we use the concepts of living and
dead labour (Marx 2015, 163), [also used by Chung (2015) in a study of
visualisation of the (un)dead in digital cinema]. Furthermore, the critical angle of
this study requires an ethical dimension to be included in the analysis, which has
largely been missing in previous research on the politics of the online dead (Aceti
2015; Meese et al. 2015; Karppi 2013). To extend our economic analysis into the
realm of ethics, we therefore employ Marx’s concept of the inorganic body and the
theory of its alienation, as outlined by Marx in the Economic and Philosophic
manuscripts of 1844 (1844/2000). However, instead of adapting a Marxist approach
fully, we develop Marx’s economic metaphor of the inorganic body into an ethical
critique by interpreting it through the lens of Floridi’s (2013a, b) defence of
informational privacy, that is—as an informational body.
4.1 Conceptualising the Economic Use of Digital Remains
In Marx’s economic philosophy, the activity of human work is sometimes referred
to as living labour. The product of labour, its antithesis, is subsequently referred to
as dead labour (Marx 2015, 163), or congealed labour. When accumulated and
commodiﬁed, such congealed (dead) labour becomes capital. Capital in turn, can
either be ﬁxed, as in the case of machines or a factory, or circulating as in the case
of money. When someone owns capital, invests in some means of production or
invests in any form of resources, it becomes necessary for them to put these in use to
produce more value.
Simpliﬁed, the role of capital (dead labour) can be described thus: For a capitalist
seeking to make proﬁt, tools (such as a saw) are useless unless worked by a labour
force to produce new objects (commodities), such as a spinning wheel. However,
the spinning wheel is just like the saw: if not sold or worked by another (human)
labour force it too has no use for the capitalist. Therefore, even more labour power
is demanded for the two objects to stay productive. Someone who has invested in a
large number of tools must therefore make the investment worthwhile by ensuring
they are worked by human labour, or face bankruptcy. In other words, dead labour
demands living labour (human work) in order to stay productive. Hence, capital is
sometimes likened to as an undead creature, or as put by Marx: ‘‘Capital is dead
labour which, vampire-like, lives only by sucking living labour, and lives the more,
the more labour it sucks’’ (Marx 2015, 163).
The Political Economy of Death in the Age of Information…
647
123


===== PAGE 10 =====

In the context of DAI, the metaphor of the undead can be interpreted rather
literally. When used in the process of creating value, deceased Internet users
actually become a form of undead agency that demands life activity (labour) from
the living in order to continue to live, that is—remain productive. Subsequently, we
propose that digital remains can be understood as a form of capital, an undead
creature that demands human life activity—living labour—in order to remain
productive. It follows, that use of digital remains for commercial purposes, creates
an interest in increasing either the sales of the remains, or consumers’ interaction
with it. Even ‘‘free’’ services such as Facebook have an incentive to attract
consumers who produce surplus attention to be sold to third parties (see Fuchs and
Sevignani 2013). Thus, ﬁrms using digital remains have an interest in increasing any
form of (productive) posthumous interaction, irrespective of what this may entail (in
the section Five we shall elabourate on some examples in more detail).
However, Marx does not only provide concepts to describe the production
process, but also ties it to a normative standpoint, what one may regard as a form of
ethic. In producing objects, one is simultaneously producing oneself—what Marx
refers to as one’s inorganic body (1844/2000, 32):
The object of labor is, therefore, the objectiﬁcation of man’s species- life: for
he duplicates himself not only, as in consciousness, intellectually, but also
actively, in reality, and therefore he sees himself in a world that he has created.
In tearing away from man the object of his production, therefore, estranged
labor tears from him his species-life, his real objectivity as a member of the
species and transforms his advantage over animals into the disadvantage that
his inorganic body [my italics], nature, is taken from him.
In the process of production, one’s inner nature is objectiﬁed, (‘‘duplicated’’) in the
material object of one’s labour. Consequentially, the loss of control of what and how
one produces (as in capitalist production), is also the loss of control of one’s
inorganic body: oneself. When forced by the market to shape himself in a certain
way, man thus becomes alienated from himself (Marx 1844/2000, 32). Alienated,
meaning he becomes a stranger to himself, loosing what makes him human, his
inherent right to shape himself. This is (as is illustrated in Sect. 4.2) where
economics ties into ethics.
As for the DAI, the estrangement of man appears to take place after death. It lies
in the fact that digital afterlife services have an incentive to shape one’s digital
remains, the product of one’s work and online identity, according to what is
proﬁtable. That is, in order to attract more consumers (either paying with attention
or money) services must shape and display digital remains in their most consumable
form. Regardless of business model, of weather a ﬁrm is charging consumers or
providing ‘‘free’’ (i.e. consumers pay with their attention) access to the digital
remains, it must display this data in a way that will attract consumers. This can be
illustrated with the following hypothetical scenario: two ﬁrms (A and B) compete on
the same market. Both are delivering a product that displays digital remains of a
deceased person. Assume that ﬁrm A displays the most accurate version of the
deceased, while ﬁrm B displays the most ‘‘consumable’’ one. Which ﬁrm is more
648
C. O¨ hman, L. Floridi
123


===== PAGE 11 =====

likely to reach greater market success? At the risk of being regarded as cynical, we
would argue that the latter is.
A consumable and an accurate image is (albeit related) not the same thing. Take
for example the custom of decorating tombstones with photos of the deceased, that
exists in some countries. Naturally, photos depicting happy moments in a person’s
life are far more popular than realistic ones representing their ﬁnal stage of life. The
dead are depicted the way the bereaved want to remember them, not necessarily
how the dead wanted to be remembered, and hardly ever as they could be
remembered in the last day of their lives. (For a more detailed analysis of how
economics may inﬂuence the depiction of suffering and death, see Montoya’s
(2012) analysis of images used in aid organisations).
In the DAI, remembrance of the dead becomes not only a matter of human
sentiment, but also a matter of economic beneﬁt. The dead are not only depicted the
way the bereaved want to remember them, but in accordance with what is proﬁtable,
i.e. what is likely to be consumed. Digital afterlife services thus have an interest in
displaying the most ‘‘consumable’’ (regardless of what that practically means), and
not the most accurate version of the dead. Such illicit alteration of one’s identity in
the name of proﬁt can be interpreted as a form of alienation.
But who precisely is alienated? Surely, Marx was never concerned with the
‘‘inorganic corpses’’ of workers. Moreover, his critique of capitalist political
economy has largely been interpreted as a matter of property relations, of the
rightful ownership of production. In our case, this is an insufﬁcient interpretation.
The dead cannot own property in the usual sense of the word, and hence one needs
to step away from such a standpoint when analysing the DAI. In order to tie the
economic interests outlined above to an ethics of digital remains, we therefore
suggest an alternate interpretation. This interpretation is based on Floridi’s
(2013a, b) ontological defence of the right to informational privacy, through which
Marx’s inorganic body can be understood as an informational body.
4.2 The Inorganic Body as an Informational Body
At the heart of Floridian (2013) ethics lies the inherent right to control one’s
personal identity, which, according to Floridi is to be understood as an informational
structure; a narrative constituted by everything that deﬁnes it: memories,
biometrical information, search history, social data, and so on. Thus, people do
not merely own their information, but are constituted by it, and exist through it. As
Floridi (2014, 121) explains, we should relate to private data as being ours in the
sense of ‘‘our body’’ rather than ‘‘our car’’. We are our own information and our
personal data are our informational bodies.
Through this view the right to informational privacy can for instance be
interpreted more adequately as the right to be in control of one’s own body and
thereby of one’s own existence; not to have it altered, duplicated, or distributed
without oneself being in control. The informational understanding the nature of the
self and its ethical status has a small, but very important implication on how to read
Marx. Consider, for instance, the excerpt quoted above from the Philosophical and
economic manuscripts (Marx 1844/2000, 32).
The Political Economy of Death in the Age of Information…
649
123


===== PAGE 12 =====

When Marx states that man ‘‘duplicates himself’’ through production, what
exactly is it that is being duplicated? What is this essence of the self that can exist in
two places; both in man himself and in the objects he produces? Floridi’s
interpretation of personal identity provides a possible answer: information. That is,
information constitutive of one’s personal identity to be more precise. If accepting
that the essence of a human consists in her information, it follows that what Marx
refers to as the inorganic body of man is to be seen as an informational body.
When understanding the inorganic body of man (what he produces) as an
informational body, the alienating effects of (privately owned) labour appear to be
closely related to violations of informational privacy. Just like informational privacy
infringements, alienation is about losing control over one’s informational body, i.e.,
over oneself. Marx (1844/2000, 30) indeed makes a similar argument in stating that
in capitalist production ‘‘he [the worker] belongs, not to himself, but to another’’.
To both Marx and Floridi, being in control of one’s identity (informational body)
is the essence of the human condition. Marx (1844/2000, 31) refers to this condition
as ‘‘conscious life activity’’, while Floridi (2016, 4) poetically describes it as ‘‘being
able to be the masters of our [humans] own journeys, and keep our identities and our
choices open’’. When someone else takes control over this ‘‘journey’’, and steers it
in whatever direction proﬁt demands, they take from us what it means to be human
or, as suggested by Marx (1844/2000, 32), it ‘‘tears from him [the human] his
species-life, his real objectivity as a member of the species’’.
To take control of a person’s productive life activity, or to infringe his/her
informational privacy, is therefore an aggression, not only to the speciﬁc individual,
but also to humanity as such, to what Floridi (2016) refers to as human dignity. To
maintain human dignity is to remain the master of one’s existence, of one’s own
‘‘journey’’ through the world. In contrast to the concept of ownership, this applies
not only to the living, but is also relevant for those who are dead. Just like the
concept of dignity applies regardless of a person’s awareness or unawareness of
having their privacy being compromised (Floridi 2013a, b), so does dignity apply
regardless of whether the producer of data is alive or not. The informational
(inorganic) body continues to have the right to be treated with the respect worthy of
a (dead) human (see Stokes 2015 for a more detailed analysis), regardless of
whether the person to which it belongs is alive or not.
Moving away from an ownership-based interpretation of the Marxian concepts,
to an ontologically grounded one, makes the economic critique outlined above
applicable to the DAI. The digital remains of the dead cannot be exploited in terms
of being denied their rightful share of proﬁt, but do nevertheless deserve the respect
worthy of a human body (corpse)—not a mere instrument for revenue generation.
They are therefore to be protected as such. The dead, just like the living, have the
right not to be alienated from themselves, a right to human dignity. Just like a
human corpse has a right to be treated with dignity, so have our digital remains. This
does surely not mean that the remains are never to be touched, but offers a
compelling critique towards their commercialisation.
As we have shown in this section, commercial enterprises have economic
incentives to display digital remains of the dead, their informational bodies,
primarily in accordance with what is proﬁtable and not necessarily what is accurate
650
C. O¨ hman, L. Floridi
123


===== PAGE 13 =====

(whatever that implies). In some cases, this means that consumers pay for
interaction with the remains of the dead; in other cases, it means shaping the
interactions so that they become as proﬁtable (attention producing) as possible.
Irrespective of which alternative is pursued, we argue that commercial alterations of
the digital remains of the dead can and should be seen as an illicit infringement on
human dignity.
5 The Interests in Practice
The interests and ethically undesirable consequences that were outlined in the
previous section were deﬁned on a rather abstract level. In practice, they are
manifested, and thus become visible, only through concrete usage of digital
remains. As previously explained, there are four ways of using digital remains on
the current market: (A) Information Management Services, (B) Online Memorial
Services, (C) Posthumous Messaging Services and (D) Re-creation Services. In this
section, real cases from each type illustrate how the interests and ethical
consequences manifest themselves in practice. As becomes clear, advanced services
with access to personal data tend to give more room for violations of human dignity
than rudimentary ones using little or insigniﬁcant amounts of information. There is
less of a risk to distort an (dead) informational body merely consisting of a bank
credentials than one that includes the complete social data of a lifetime. In other
words, the larger the quantity and quality of information used in a service, the
higher the risk of altering how it is being displayed, of violating the human dignity
of the dead. Let us see how.
(A) Information Management Services. A typical Information Management
Service is Capsoole, a company that allows their users to prepare for their passing
by organising digital assets such as passwords, images and other types of
information by sending it to appointed heirs. For Capsoole, digital remains take the
role of raw material (Means of Production). Therefore, the ﬁrm has an abstract
interest in increasing interaction with the remains. This means having the users pass
on as much content as possible to their heirs, which in turn makes them more
present in the lives of the bereaved.
The dead users are made posthumously present through emails containing
information, with details such as the location of a certain possession, the deceased’s
funeral wishes, or passwords for social networking sites or subscriptions. While this
must not necessarily be regarded as problematic, it is not coincidence that the
architecture of the Capsoole website is designed to make the user purchase services
that allow for more content and assets to be passed on—thereby moving the nature
of their digital afterlife in the direction of more presence and more interaction with
the bereaved. Expressed differently, this is an endeavour to shape the informational
body of the dead to ﬁt the demands of proﬁt. However, as there is little room for
Capsoole to alter the display of the information, it is unlikely to display the users in
ways threatening human dignity.
The Political Economy of Death in the Age of Information…
651
123


===== PAGE 14 =====

(B) Posthumous Messaging Services. A representative example of Posthumous
Messaging Services is the ﬁrm Heavenote (2016a), which allows their users to
posthumously send various types of content to appointed recipients. The afterlife
presence of the dead thus takes the role of a commodity, a service to be consumed.
However, the site does not only provide a service; it is also designed to steer the
usage of this service in a speciﬁc direction—to produce a more proﬁtable afterlife.
For every free feature the user chooses, a paid option with more data is suggested,
such as: ‘‘you can record 30 s video, go Premium and get 10 min of video recording
in each message’’ (Heavenote 2016a). Likewise, a quarter (roughly) of the user
interface is covered with ads to promote premium or ‘‘ambassador’’5 options, which
both entail changes in the nature of the user’s afterlife. In addition to the design of
the user interface, one can also see the abstract economic interests manifested in
Heavenote’s adverts (Heavenote 2016b):
Taking your digital afterlife into your own hands is one of the nicest things you
can do for those who care about you […]. Not only will you be able to give a
message that might be the single greatest thing you could do for them, but you can
also show a handy amount of foresight and impress all of those friends that will be
gathered upon your death. Digital afterlife planning will be that last act of reminding
people of how great you were in life, trust us. Try sending a message for free if you
aren’t sold.
The excerpt is illustrative of how the abstract interest in ‘‘consumability’’
manifests itself concretely in the Posthumous Messaging Services. The discourse is
aiming to increase productivity (social interaction), and thereby to alter the user’s
digital afterlife. The site is discursively and architecturally designed to promote a
proﬁtable digital afterlife.
(C) Online Memorial Services. Differently from the mere messaging sites,
memorials often display more information, and use a larger piece of the
informational body of the dead. While some are free (i.e. capitalise on the surplus
attention of the mourning) others charge the users. In both cases, ﬁrms have an
interest in maximising the ‘‘consumability’’ of the digital remains. One can see this
interest manifested in the various attempts to make memorials attract visitors.
Without the request of the bereaved users, some sites even put headings, in the style
of ‘‘He is much loved and will always be remembered by all his friends and family’’
(Fowler 2014), on the memorialisation of the deceased. Some sites also add
background music, and clipboard pictures of doves and sunsets (Fowler 2014).
Due to its size and central position in society, the most relevant example of
Online Memorial Services is Facebook. Facebook ‘‘memorializes’’ the proﬁles of
their dead users, and uses them as a means to produce surplus attention and user
activity from the bereaved, which in turn can be sold to a third party. For instance,
when family and friends keep using a memorialised proﬁle as a shared space for
grief [as has become everyday practices for many in the West (Brubaker et al. 2013,
154)], they also keep exposing themselves to Facebook’s targeted advertisement.
The interests of the site are thus to maximise the labour power (here in the form of
5 To become an ambassador one has to invite friends to use the service. As a reward, one gets more data
to use.
652
C. O¨ hman, L. Floridi
123


===== PAGE 15 =====

attention/consumption) put into the memorialised proﬁles, that is, to maximize
interaction.
The interest in maximised interaction is manifested in features (Memorialization
and Legacy Contact) that allow for continuous interaction with, and consumption of,
the proﬁle of the dead. While it becomes impossible to log into the account,
Facebook-friends of the deceased may still visit the proﬁle and post messages. To
facilitate such communication, Facebook also allows a ‘‘legacy contact’’ (Facebook
2015) to manage the proﬁle of the deceased. Gradually, Facebook is moving
towards a solution that allows for more interaction with the deceased. They are
making the dead increasingly ‘‘alive’’ or, expressed differently, undead, as the
proﬁles demands activity from the living users in order to remain productive. These
are typical illustrations of how the commercial nature of the DAI may affect and
alter the informational remains of the dead to ﬁt a more commercial purpose.
(D) Re-creation Services. Services that aim to re-create the personality of the
dead do naturally demand vast amounts of social data in order to perform. Due to
the large quantities (and quality) of information, it is likely that the interests of the
ﬁrm may inﬂuence the identity of the digital remains. One example is the social
network site Eter9.com. It is a social network where dead users live on as so called
‘‘Niners’’, a form of AI-agents that replicate users’ behaviour and manages the
account while the user is ofﬂine, or dies (Eter9.com 2016). In theory, the site’s
interest is twofold: to increase interaction with the digital remains of the dead (the
Niners) and thus to make that interaction as consumable as possible.
Eter9’s economic interests are manifested in the way the ‘‘Niners’’ are
programmed. While the user is ofﬂine, they are created to seek contact
autonomously with other organic users of the platform. In doing so, they create
more connections, interactions, and, ultimately, value for the ﬁrm. Simply put, the
Niners are programmed to be consumable. This ‘‘consumability’’ can be seen as an
incentive to alter a user’s informational remains. The Niner left behind by an
antisocial user will for instance be more prone to social interaction than the person it
replicates, since it is more productive to make connections (i.e. increase user
activity and attention) than not. This is a practical example of how the abstract
interests identiﬁed in the previous section play out in real businesses. It is also a
direct example of the ethically undesirable consequences that arise as productivity is
maximized, and as the users loose of their control over their (dead) informational
bodies.
The above cases illustrate the practical manifestation of the abstract interests and
ethical consequences outlined in the previous sections. One may argue, that the
possibility of altering the digital remains of the dead (and thereby violating their
human dignity) progresses as services become more technologically advanced and
get access to more rich information. However, while all services have economic
incentives to maximise production, one should not expect ﬁrms to maximise
productivity in every way possible. This is because the productivity of digital
remains is not the sole factor determining market success but is instead negotiated
with numerous other factors. In the following section, we shall discuss regulatory
The Political Economy of Death in the Age of Information…
653
123


===== PAGE 16 =====

response as such a factor, and what ethical principles that should guide this
response.
6 Summary and Discussion
This article set out to provide a more precise understanding of the economics and
ethical consequences of the DAI. The three research questions that were posed to
pursue this purpose have now been answered. In summarising the results, this ﬁnal
section also discusses their implications, especially with regards to their role in
shaping a regulatory response to the DAI. This means that two things are broadly
discussed: how the ﬁndings of this study contribute to the general understanding of
digital afterlife, and how this understanding may inform regulatory action.
6.1 Conceptualising the Digital Afterlife
Once its frames are deﬁned, the very concept of the DAI allows one to see a
connection between a number of seemingly different phenomena. Furthermore, the
various businesses dealing with death on the Internet appear as practical
manifestations of the same (abstract) economic mechanisms. Consequently, the
study ties together several different research areas. It allows one to identify
systematically connections between policy oriented (Laouris 2015; McCallig 2013),
philosophical (Stokes 2015; Swan and Howard 2012; Steinhart; 2007) and more
empirically grounded research (Grimm and Chiasson 2014; Mitchell et al. 2012), as
these research ﬁelds can all be related to the economics of digital afterlife.
As we become aware of the economic interests underlying digital afterlife ﬁrms,
we are able not only to see ties between previous research ﬁndings, but also to
reinterpret them. One example is Mitchell et al. (2012) study of online memorials
for deceased children, where the authors point out ‘‘the affordances of the Web’’
(Mitchell et al. 2012, 28) as a driving cause behind prolonged grief:
[…] under the guise of addressing or even treating parental grief, on-line
memorials may do more than simply accommodate that grief; they may
perpetuate it. By enabling the deceased to persist, parenting to continue, and
grief to be continually communicated, acknowledged and legitimated within a
community of bereaved parents and a wider public, the Web affords an on-
going grief that is unhinged partially from longstanding ideas of ‘closure’,
privacy, and a separation of the living and the dead.
The analysis provided in this article suggests a reinterpretation of such ﬁndings not
just as a consequence of new ICTs but also, more speciﬁcally, as a consequence of
their economic role in the production process. It is not the Web itself, but the way it
is utilized in an economic system that perpetuates grief. Additionally, our ﬁndings
shift the focus from being solely about the consequences for the bereaved to being
654
C. O¨ hman, L. Floridi
123


===== PAGE 17 =====

also about the rights and ‘‘well-being’’ of the informational remains as moral
patients in themselves.
The same kind of improvement can be made for theoretically oriented research.
One example is Walter’s (2015) argument about the societal presence of the dead
and its historical dependence on the affordances of ICTs. While it is an accurate
observation that digital media is changing the presence of the dead, the statement
can be further nuanced. It is rather technology’s role as a commodity or means in the
production process that is the driving force in shaping the presence of the dead. As
this study has illustrated, technology’s role in mediating the presence of the dead is
embedded in human practices, and human practice is in turn a matter of human
(ethical) decision-making.
The ethical and the economic dimensions of the DAI intersect in the concept of
the informational body. The metaphor is economic (Marxian), insofar as it shows
the relationship between oneself and what one produces, namely information. It is
ethical (Floridian), insofar as it makes this information in itself a moral patient.
While other researchers (Karppi 2013; Meese et al. 2015) have also noted the
interests in keeping the dead within the networked economies of social media, their
arguments have not illuminated fully the ethical dimensions of the matter, nor the
mechanisms behind them. While the lens of discourse used by Meese et al. (and to
some extent Karppi) has provided important insights into the commercialisation of
death online, it does not fully explain its political economy. We would hence like to
add to their ﬁndings that discourse should be seen as a result, and not the cause, of
the mechanisms that drive commercialisation of death online.
6.2 Shaping a Response to the Industry
When digital remains, as suggested in this study, are seen as remains of an
informational human body, the problem of the DAI ﬁnally emerges as a commercial
(and illegitimate) alteration of this body, which in turn is a result of politico-
economic interests. Furthermore, the body metaphor can be seen as an invitation for
legislators who deal with the DAI to seek inspiration from trade regulations of the
remains of organic bodies. While Floridi (2013a, b, 245) has already compared
informational privacy infringement with organ trade, death adds a new dimension to
the analogy. When a person passes away, their organic body continues to hold some
of the rights of the person. For instance, it cannot be traded or altered without the
explicit consent of the individual to which it belonged. The comparison is however
not perfect; restrictions can still be motivated with reference to the wellbeing of the
bereaved, rather than the body’s own inherent right to respect and dignity.
A better comparison may be with archaeological and medical museums, which
have a great deal in common with the DAI. Both deal with objects that are difﬁcult
to allocate to a speciﬁc owner (see for instance Pearson 1999, 191), and both are
displaying these objects for the living to consume (Alberti and Hallam 2013, 3).
Furthermore, as many collections now become digitalised and made available
online (Alberti and Hallam 2013, 13) the connection becomes even more striking.
Respect for ancient human remains (without any known descendants) cannot be
correlated with reference to the wellbeing of their bereaved. And yet, many
The Political Economy of Death in the Age of Information…
655
123


===== PAGE 18 =====

intuitively feel a responsibility to respect the moral status of such objects, namely a
respect for the body in itself. For these reasons, it is no surprise to ﬁnd that the
international museum codes of ethics that regulate exhibitions of human remains are
rooted in the very principal of human dignity (ICOM 1986, 6)—the very same
principle on which the Floridian (2016) notion of informational privacy is founded.
While the deﬁnition of human dignity may vary in different cultural contexts
(Montoya 2012), there are some situations on which most of us will intuitively
agree. We do not, for instance, put a Santa hat on O¨ tzi the Iceman to attract more
museum visitors around Christmas, nor do we accept ghost tours in the tomb of
Tutankhamun (despite our disbelief in the ancient gods of Egypt). In archaeological
excavations of graves, bodies are even reburied after having been examined by
researchers (Pearson 1999, 186). Similarly, there is reason to protect the online dead
from undigniﬁed forms of commercialisation.
Hitherto, the DAI have seldom demonstrated the same monstrosity as the O¨ tzi the
Iceman-example. Yet, there are plenty of examples of how an unregulated industry
may come to look in the near future. In a recent news story on Unilad.com, photos
from an open cofﬁn-funeral were published, where the photographer had used a
Snapchat ﬁlter to swap his own face with the deceased’s (Roberts 2016). A dog nose
and ears were also jokingly added using the same application. In a matter of less
than 2 days, the article gained signiﬁcant attention—more than 7500 shares, and
almost 46,000 votes on the attached question ‘‘how fucked up is this on a scale of
one to absolutely fucked?’’, a good source of revenue for Unilad.com. Despite not
being a digital afterlife service, the example illustrates the mechanisms that have
been explored in this article, which result in being a violation of human dignity.
The Unilad.com example is a single and extreme case, but it is also a good
illustration of a larger phenomenon. The physical body of the deceased was left
untouched, but a piece of the informational body (the digital picture) was altered
and distributed in the name of commerce. Yet, the action is intuitively repulsive in
the same way as if the dog nose would have been put on the physical body and not
the photo. The ﬁndings of this article clarify and justify this repulsiveness, phrasing
it as the deceased’s loss of control of his informational (inorganic) body; as a
violation of human dignity. The ﬁndings also show how such situations are linked to
some speciﬁc economic mechanisms. They provide a language, a way of thinking
about the presence of the online dead, which in turn offers a direction for our
practical response.
At the beginning of this article, we argued that answering the research questions
would put us in a better position to design social and economic infrastructures as a
response to the undesirable consequences of the DAI. We have done so by
suggesting that the ethical principles upon which the DAI is to be regulated should
be the same as those that guide archaeological museums that exhibit remains of
organic bodies: human dignity. The next step required will be a detailed analysis of
how the regulation of organic remains translates to the realm of the DAI. This,
however, is a topic for future research.
656
C. O¨ hman, L. Floridi
123


===== PAGE 19 =====

7 Concluding Comments
To summarise, the contribution of this article is twofold. It has identiﬁed and
constructed a conceptual map of the economics of the DAI, and it has deconstructed
its ethical dimensions. Having done so, the article raises a set of new questions.
What should be the role of commercial enterprises in managing the data of the
dead? How do we design social, economic and regulatory infrastructures that render
a respectful attitude from the industry? We have only begun addressing these
questions in mature information societies. Yet, two things are already clear: that the
Internet will continue to be an integral part of everyday life and that humans will (at
least in the organic sense) continue to die. The dead are, and will continue to be,
increasingly present online. It is up to us as a society to decide to what extent, and
under what circumstances, this presence is to be inﬂuenced by the industry that
mediates it.
Open Access This article is distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution 4.0
International License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/), which permits unrestricted use, dis-
tribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided you give appropriate credit to the original
author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons license, and indicate if changes were
made.
The Political Economy of Death in the Age of Information…
657
123


===== PAGE 20 =====

Appendix: Organisation of Concrete Usages of Digital Remains
658
C. O¨ hman, L. Floridi
123


===== PAGE 21 =====

References
Aceti, L. (2015). Eternally present and eternally absent: The cultural politics of a thanatophobic Internet
and its visual representations of artiﬁcial existences. Mortality, 20(4), 319–333.
Alberti, S., & Hallam, E. (2013). Medical museums: Past, present, future. Retrieved from: https://www.
researchgate.net/publication/273506763_Medical_Museums_Past_Present_Future.
The Political Economy of Death in the Age of Information…
659
123


===== PAGE 22 =====

Ambrosino, B. (2016). Facebook as a growing and unstoppable graveyard. BBC.com, March 14. http://
www.bbc.com/future/story/20160313-the-unstoppable-rise-of-the-facebook-dead.
Accessed
1
August 2016.
Brown, K. V. (2016). We calculated the year dead people on Facebook could outnumber the living.
Fusion.net, April 3. http://fusion.net/story/276237/the-number-of-dead-people-on-facebook-will-
soon-outnumber-the-living/. Accessed 1 August 2016.
Brubaker,J. R.,Hayes, G.R.,& Dourish,P. (2013).Beyondthe grave: Facebookasa siteforthe expansionof
death and mourning. The Information Society, 29, 152–163. Published with license by Taylor &
Francis. ISSN: 0197-2243 print/1087-6537. doi:10.1080/01972243.2013.777300.
Carrol, E. (2015, Sep 26). Final revised UFADA now available. Retrieved from: http://www.
thedigitalbeyond.com/2015/09/ﬁnal-revised-ufada-now-available/.
Carrol, E., & Romaro, J. (2011). Your digital afterlife: When Facebook, Flickr and Twitter are your
estate, what’s your legacy?. Berkeley, CA: New Riders.
Carroll, E., Romano, J., Carroll, E., Romano, J., Mitchell, L. M., Stephenson, P. H., et al. (2015). Your
digital afterlives: Computational theories of life after death. Minds and Machines, 17(4), 363–379.
doi:10.5172/hesr.2012.21.4.413.
Chung, H. J. (2015). The reanimation of the digital (un)dead, or how to regenerate bodies in digital
cinema. Visual Studies, 30(1), 54–67.
Church, S. H. (2013). Digital gravescapes: Digital memorializing on Facebook, 2243, 148–189. doi:10.
1080/01972243.2013.777309.
de Oliveira, J., Reis, L. P., & Amaral, L. (2015). Plataforms for digital heritage management. In 2015
10th Iberian Conference on Information Systems and Technologies (CISTI) (pp. 1–6). IEEE. doi:10.
1109/CISTI.2015.7170505.
Death Reference Desk. (2012). 19,000 Facebook users die each day. Here is how FB’s memorialization
mode works, February 5. http://www.deathreferencedesk.org/2012/02/05/19000-facebook-users-die-
each-day-here-is-how-fbs-memorialization-mode-works/. Accessed 1 August 2016.
Engel, J. (2015). Death in the digital age: Tech startups help us cope with mortality. Xonomy.com, October
28.
http://www.xconomy.com/boston/2015/10/28/deathin-the-digital-age-tech-startups-help-us-
cope-with-mortality. Accessed 1 August 2016.
Eter9.com. (2016). About. Retrieved from: https://www.eter9.com/help/about.
Facebook. (2015). Adding a legacy contact, February 12. http://newsroom.fb.com/news/2015/02/adding-
a-legacy-contact/. Accessed 1 August 2016.
Facebook. (2016). Memorialized accounts. https://www.facebook.com/help/1506822589577997. Acces-
sed 1 August 2016.
Floridi, L. (2013a). The ethics of information. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Floridi, L. (2013b). Distributed morality in an information society. Science and Engineering Ethics,
19(3), 727–743. doi:10.1007/s11948-012-9413-4.
Floridi, L. (2014). The fourth revolution—How the infosphere is reshaping human reality. Oxford: Oxford
University Press.
Floridi, L. (2016). On human dignity as a foundation for the right to privacy. Philosophy and Technology.
doi:10.1007/s13347-016-022.
Foot, K., Warnick, B., & Schneider, S. M. (2005). Web-based memorializing after September 11: Toward
a conceptual framework. Journal of Computer-Mediated Communication, 11(1), 72–96.
Forbes. (2015). Top-earning dead celebrities 2015. Forbes.com. Retrieved from: http://www.forbes.com/
dead-celebrities/#524884ce6a51.
Fowler, G. (2014). Online memorial services: After a death, celebrating a life online. The Wall Street
Journal,
January
28.
http://www.wsj.com/articles/SB100014240527023035532045793487522
62042642. Accessed 1 August 2016.
Fuchs, C., & Sevignani, S. (2013). What is digital labour? What is digital work? What’s their difference?
And why do these questions matter for understanding social media? TripleC, 11, 237–293.
Graham, C., Gibbs, M., & Aceti, L. (2013). Introduction to the special issue on the death, afterlife, and
immortality of bodies and data. The Information Society, 29(3), 133–141. doi:10.1080/01972243.
2013.777296.
Grimm, C., & Chiasson, S. (2014). Survey on the fate of digital footprints after death. Usec’14,
(February). https://cs.carleton.ca/sites/default/ﬁles/tr/TR-14-01.pdf. Accessed 1 August 2016.
Heavenote. (2016a). Create your ﬁrst message. https://www.heavenote.com/. Accessed 1 August 2016.
Heavenote. (2016b). Why we all need a plan for our digital afterlife, May 6. https://www.heavenote.com/
blog/why-we-all-need-a-plan-for-our-digital-afterlife/. Accessed 1 August 2016.
660
C. O¨ hman, L. Floridi
123


===== PAGE 23 =====

Horton, D., & Wohl, R. R. (2006). Mass communication and parasocial interaction: Observations on
intimacy at a distance. Psychiatry [Online], 19. http://www.participations.org/volume%203/issue%
201/301hortonwohl.htm.
International Council of Museums (ICOM). (1986). Code of professional ethics. http://archives.icom.
museum/1986code_eng.pdf. Accessed 1 August 2016.
Karppi, T. (2013). Death proof: On the biopolitics and noopolitics of memorializing dead Facebook
proﬁles. Culture Machine, 14. Retrieved from: www.culturemachine.net/index.php/cm/article/
download/…/528.
Kern, R., Abbe, E. F., & Gil-Egui, G. (2013). ‘R.I.P.: Remain in perpetuity. Facebook memorial pages.’
Telematics and Informatics, 30, 2–10. http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S07365
85312000263. Accessed 29 October 2012.
Laouris, Y. (2015). The Onlife Manifesto. In L. Floridi (Ed.), The Onlife Manifesto: Being human in a
hyperconnected era. Cham: Springer International Publishing. doi:10.1007/978-3-319-04093-6.
Lingel, J. (2013). The digital remains: Social media and practices of online grief. The Information
Society, 29(3), 190–195. doi:10.1080/01972243.2013.777311.
Marwick, A. (2013). Status update: Celebrity, publicity and branding in the social media age. Yale
University Press. Retrieved from: http://www.jstor.org/stable/j.ctt5vkzxr.
Marx, K. (1999). A contribution to the critique of political economy. Retrieved from: https://www.
marxists.org/archive/marx/works/download/Marx_Contribution_to_the_Critique_of_Political_Economy.
pdf. Originally published 1859.
Marx, K. (2000). Economic and philosophic manuscripts of 1844. Retrieved from: https://www.marxists.
org/archive/marx/works/download/pdf/Economic-Philosophic-Manuscripts-1844.pdf.
Originally
published 1932.
Marx, K. (2015). Capital a critique of political economy volume I book one: The process of production of
capital.
Retrieved
from:
https://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/download/pdf/Capital-
Volume-I.pdf. Originally published 1876.
Mayer-Scho¨nberger, V. (2009). Delete: The virtue of forgetting in the digital age. Princeton, NJ: Princeton
University Press.
McCallig, D. (2013). Facebook after death: An evolving policy in a social network. International Journal
of Law and Information Technology, 22(2), 107–140. doi:10.1093/ijlit/eat012.
Meese, J., Nansen, B., Kohn, T., Arnold, M., & Gibbs, M. (2015). Posthumous personhood and the
affordances of digital media. Mortality, 20(4), 408–420. doi:10.1080/13576275.2015.1083724.
Miller, R. (2016). Gmail has now 1 billion monthly active users. The Verge, February 1. http://www.
theverge.com/2016/2/1/10889492/gmail-1-billion-google-alphabet. Accessed 1 August 2016.
Mitchell, L. M., Stephenson, P. H., Cadell, S., & Macdonald, M. E. (2012). Death and grief on-line:
Virtual memorialization and changing concepts of childhood death and parental bereavement on the
Internet. Health Sociology Review, 21(4), 413–431. doi:10.5172/hesr.2012.21.4.413.
Montoya, A. (2012). From ‘‘the people’’ to ‘‘the human’’: HIV/AIDS, neoliberalism, and the economy of
virtue in contemporary Vietnam. Positions: East Asia Cultures Critique, 20(2), 561–591.
Neate, R. (2014). How celebrities can make millions after death: Meet the man with the formula. The
Guardian, November 22. https://www.theguardian.com/music/2014/nov/22/celebrities-millions-
after-death-bob-marley-michael-jackson. Accessed 1 August 2016.
O’brien, M. (2015, August 28). Who owns your digital afterlife? Mercurynews.com. Retrieved from:
http://www.mercurynews.com/business/ci_28721510/who-owns-your-digital-afterlife.
Pearson, M. P. (1999). The archaeology of death and burial. Texas A and M University Anthropology
Series, (no 3), 250 pp. doi:10.1086/342438.
Roberts, J. (2016). Is this the most outrageous use of Snap Chat ever? Unilad.com. July 2. http://www.
unilad.co.uk/viral/is-this-the-most-outrageous-use-of-snapchat-ever/. Accessed 1 August 2016.
Sherlock, A. (2013). Larger than life: Digital resurrection and the re-enchantment of society. The
Information Society, 29(3), 164–176. doi:10.1080/01972243.2013.77730.
Smith, J. (2011). McAfee reveals average Internet user has more than $37,000 in underprotected digital
assets, September 27. http://www.mcafee.com/us/about/news/2011/q3/20110927-01.aspx. Accessed
1 August 2016.
Steinhart, E. (2007). Survival as a digital ghost. Minds and Machines, 17(3), 261–271. doi:10.1007/
s11023-007-9068-0.
Stokes, P. (2012). Ghosts in the machine: DO the dead live on in facebook? Philosophy and Technology,
25(3), 363–379. doi:10.1007/s13347-011-0050-7.
The Political Economy of Death in the Age of Information…
661
123


===== PAGE 24 =====

Stokes, P. (2015). Deletion as second death: The moral status of digital remains. Ethics and Information
Technology, 17(4), 1–12. doi:10.1007/s10676-015-9379-4.
Swan, L. S., & Howard, J. (2012). Digital immortality: Self or 0010110? International Journal of
Machine Consciousness, 4(1), 245–256. doi:10.1142/S1793843012400148.
Walter, T. (2015). Communication media and the dead: From the stone age to Facebook. Mortality:
Promoting the Interdisciplinary Study of Death and Dying, 6275, 1–33. doi:10.1080/13576275.
2014.993598.
Wright, N. (2014). Death and the Internet: The implications of the digital afterlife. First Monday. doi:10.
5210/fm.v19i6.499.
662
C. O¨ hman, L. Floridi
123
