ID: A03
DOI: 10.1080/01972243.2013.777311
中文译名: 数字遗存：社交媒体与网络悲伤实践
英文原题: The Digital Remains: Social Media and Practices of Online Grief
原文件: 文献全文/正文/A03_2013_数字遗存：社交媒体与网络悲伤实践__The Digital Remains Social Media and Practices of Online Grief.pdf
源URL: https://repository.upenn.edu/bitstreams/15d5289f-43c7-43db-94dc-f19b966cb10c/download
提取说明: 仅为机械文本提取，页码标记依原PDF；不代表已完成论证核验。


===== PAGE 1 =====

1 
 
The Digital Remains: Social Media and Practices of Online Grief 
The Digital Remains: Social Media and Practices of Online Grief 
With an increasing number of social activities taking place online, an emotionally fraught and 
culturally complex question has surfaced regarding what happens to someone’s online content and identity 
after death. Social media sites are increasingly sophisticated in the development of tools and applications 
available for users to interact with each other online, but when it comes to virtual versions of bereavement, 
both the technical and cultural protocols for processing grief are still very much in the process of 
developing. This paper examines Facebook’s policy on the pages of site members who have died as a 
means of addressing online grief as a social phenomenon, as well as a point of access to tensions 
surrounding questions of online identity and computer-mediated communication. The background for this 
analysis is established with a brief discussion of traditional funerary practices in the United States1, before 
moving to a review of scholarship that addresses grief, and online grief specifically. Methodology for 
analysis of online discussions of Facebook’s policy is outlined, taking into account issues of how online 
identities are theorized and why blogs are specifically appropriate as a source of interpretation for 
examining online grief. Themes from these online discussions are identified in order to analyze how social 
media users understand practices of virtual bereavement, and more generally conceive of constructing 
online identities, relationships and communities. Analysis of online grief creates a space for understanding 
a social phenomenon as it is being formed, but also for consideration of what it means to construct, 
maintain and lose relationships and identities that are formed online. 
The social context of online grief 
                                                             
1 Although this analysis is predominantly concerned with examining changing practices of grief in the 
United States, location is an increasingly difficult focus to manage in online environments where users from dispersed 
geographic points can interact irrespective of time zones and spatial distance. 
 


===== PAGE 2 =====

2 
 
Understanding online grief in the United States as a cultural, collective practice requires situating it 
in a larger historical tradition of interacting with death. The following section introduces anthropological and 
sociological examinations of grief, with the aim of weaving together analyses of cultural components of 
traditional and virtual bereavement in order to determine dimensions of these social rituals that are 
alternately challenged and reinforced by technological change. 
In Metcalf and Huntington’s (1991) classic anthropological survey of rituals of death, the authors 
devoted the final chapter of their text to an analysis of funerals in the United States. In their discussion, the 
authors outlined a paradox in the homogeneity of funeral practices somehow sustained by a heterogeneity 
of personal beliefs: 
Because American funerary rituals are so … uniform, one might reasonably assume that it would 
be correspondingly easier to deduce the ideology underlying them. But this is not so ... Americans 
claim adherence to a number of different denominations, whose formal doctrines on the fate of the 
soul in death are dissimilar. (p. 195-196) 
Although the rituals surrounding death (the embalming process, the wake, the funeral home) are generally 
familiar and ideologically accessible, the individual beliefs underlying these processes are much less so. 
Another way of positing this division between individual and collective behavior is to question whether the 
homogeneity of rituals obscures actual beliefs, emotions and needs of individual mourners. Along these 
lines, Metcalf and Huntington elaborated the differences between cultural practices and individual 
sentiments, where "between ritual and emotion there is a subtle feedback so that it is difficult at any 
moment to say whether the emotions are propelling the ritual or vice versa" (p. 203). Metcalf and 
Huntington are here suggesting that the order and general recognizability of funerary practices do not 
(entirely) mitigate personal feelings of grief, loss and emotional conflict. Furthermore, participating in rituals 
of mourning requires a negotiation of individual feelings and expectations of fulfilling collectively-sanctioned 
social obligations, where Metcalf and Huntington suggest that there is something of a conflation of private 


===== PAGE 3 =====

3 
 
emotions and public practices at work in funeral rituals. Ostensibly, funerals as cultural rituals provide 
spaces for publicly coping with death, where an individual can process someone’s passing through displays 
of grief that cohere with collectively-constructed rituals, which do not eliminate or neutralize individual 
feelings so much as provide a site for their display. In terms of online versus offline practices, this claim is 
not so much an assertion that traditional rituals of mourning are rigidly defined and unanimously followed, 
only that these practices are more recognizable, with more coherent protocols, than emergent, internet-
based practices. The construct of subtle feedback between individual feelings and collective rituals serves 
as an apt description of the halting, iterative Internet discussions where online grief as a cultural 
phenomenon is being individually interpreted (and enacted) even as the practices themselves are unfolding 
and evolving. 
More specifically, one facet of traditional funeral practices that has been fundamentally altered by 
technological change involves disseminating news of someone’s passing. Within their description of the 
development of funerary practices in the United States, Metcalf and Huntington (1991) discussed protocols 
related to the circulation of information about a death, which cover "both the way that people are told, and 
the order in which they are told” (p. 204, italics in original). In a traditional model, the circulation of 
information is regulated by the degree of intimacy with the deceased, where immediate family is notified 
before extended family, close friends before neighbors and coworkers, with information eventually being 
filtered to loosely-affiliated acquaintances (p. 205). In this way, knowledge becomes a signifier of intimacy, 
and the order in which family and friends are made aware of a death makes explicit levels of privilege within 
the surrounding social ecology of the deceased. This process of notification, which is fairly controlled and 
linear, is threatened, if not entirely upended, by the ability of social media sites to inform an entire set of 
online “friends” of someone’s passing with a single broadcast post or status update. Online, the hierarchy of 
intimacy honored by traditional information protocols is thus flattened into a unilateral awareness of 
someone’s passing, irrespective of the offline level of intimacy between users. 


===== PAGE 4 =====

4 
 
In addition to traditional protocols of informing a social group about a death, there are prescribed, 
normative places (a wake, a Shiva, a burial) in which grief has traditionally been displayed. Attendance at 
these events is highly regulated; as Sudnow described, “information is sought as to the propriety of a visit, 
to make sure of not intruding on an intimate family scene ... an organizer often emerges who is able to 
decide matters of protocol; someone close enough to the family to be aware of their desires, but not so 
close as to be more properly concerned in active grieving” (Sudnow 1967: 156-7, in Metcalf and 
Huntington, p. 205). In place of a physical space established as a setting for grief, mourning can now take 
place (either in addition to or instead of physical spaces) online, on memorialized Facebook pages, 
comments of an obituary, or in chatroom support groups. Rather than coalescing around the implicit and 
explicit instructions of an accepted moderator for organizing and monitoring funeral rituals, there are 
malleable, fluid roles that can be taken up by a number of the deceased’s acquaintances, with or without 
the family’s sanctioning. The emergence of social media sites can thus be seen as disruptive to rituals of 
mourning on several levels: disseminating information about death, providing a virtual (rather than physical) 
space in which to display grief, and altering social protocols for roles in collective mourning. 
Related to the lack of moderation, a critical affordance of online grief is the ability to craft individual 
responses to death in an open venue that is less constrained by social and cultural obligations than a 
funeral home or cemetery. Even so, participating in an online forum involves displays of grief that do not 
take place without spectators. Although individual messages of mourning may manifest deeply personal 
feelings, they are subject to, constructed and witnessed by social (if virtual) surroundings, and these 
surroundings in fact form a crucial process of coping with and working through loss. In their analysis of 
complex grief, Neimeyer, Prigerson and Davies (2002) posited that “the meaning making triggered by loss 
is pursued at the juncture of self and system rather than only in the private thoughts and feelings of the 
bereaved individual. Thus, the self is constituted and reconstituted in relation to an embracing social world,” 
(p. 239). As a process, bereavement requires both a personal and public negotiation of signification, and 


===== PAGE 5 =====

5 
 
this need for meaning-making is increasingly taking place in online forums. This movement towards online 
interaction in the context of grief is made possible through the formation of online identity, where both 
mourners and the mourned are constructed in computer-mediated discourses of social as well as 
technological protocols. 
Having worked through some of the established protocols in traditional funeral rituals, we can now 
turn specifically to scholarship examining online grief. In the limited (but growing) literature on social media 
sites and politics of death, a number of articles have focused on social media and death in terms of 
celebrity culture. For example, Sanderson and Cheong (2010) examined user messages related to the 
death of Michael Jackson, and the findings indicated that social media sites allowed fans to work through 
(rather than reject or deny) the death of a beloved music icon. Gibson (2007) also addressed computer-
mediated grief largely in consideration of celebrity deaths, but in the course of her analysis of both fictional 
and celebrity deaths on television and in online media, Gibson advanced the notion of do-it-yourself (DIY) 
forms of mourning (p. 416), where practices of negotiating death are being undertaken individually and 
displayed publically. DIY mourning involves forging personal responses to death in an impromptu but 
networked way, where the virtual venues in which reactions to death are crafted offer points of connection 
within the deceased’s social community. As Gibson has written: 
One of the peculiar features of the internet is that it enables very personal and intimate 
communication to take place between strangers who may or may not become identified as friends. 
The grieving may find that it is amongst strangers or “virtually located” friends that they gain 
consistent support particularly when the time for talking about grief has stopped between other 
friends and work colleagues. (p. 422) 
Online grief can thus be positioned as an opening up of organized, established practices, which is not so 
much a rejection of traditional mourning as a moving past or setting aside of these rites in order to foster 
new modes of social support. The emergence of DIY mourning suggests that although traditional funeral 


===== PAGE 6 =====

6 
 
rites may continue to be followed, there is a developing interest, or perhaps even need, to craft, organically 
and disparately, individual displays, practices and rituals for experiencing loss. Focusing on adolescent 
behavior, Williams and Merten (2009) analyzed social media site profiles of deceased adolescents in order 
to determine “whether adolescents use online social networking to cope with the death of a peer; more 
importantly, if they do use the Internet for this purpose, what do their coping strategies entail?” (p. 72). 
Their analysis found that the users’ peers continued to direct comments directly to the deceased user’s 
page rather than friends, family and other mourners (p. 76), an interesting contrast to traditional rituals of 
mourning, in which public displays of grief are not typically addressed (directly) to the dead.  
Although this literature suggests that the Internet is being used as a crucial coping strategy for 
processing death, these behaviors are often emotionally vibrant, but not (yet?) entirely consistent in 
content. Social media sites collapse geographic boundaries, meaning that online grieving is essentially 
free, as opposed to the cost of providing or attending funerals. In addition, online mourning can be seen as 
an extension of the non-denominationality of death rituals in the United States (Metcalf and Huntington, 
1991, p. 214). Although displays of online bereavement may reference religion, the cohesion of these 
references within a single denomination is less likely than a variety of disparate, diverse religious citations. 
In contrast to the homogeneity of funeral customs described by Metcalf and Huntington, online grief lacks 
the established history and cultural familiarity of traditional practices, and is a still-developing phenomenon 
that has yet to take (and in fact may never take) a rigidly-defined shape. 
Social media and displays of grief 
An extended examination of the formulation of online identity is beyond the scope of this article, 
however, given that this analysis centers on online discussions, it is worth stating briefly how computer-
mediated relationships are here understood. This analysis follows Rybas and Gajjala’s (2007) argument 
that technological interaction should be examined as an embodied practice in which "subjects/objects 
produce selves - through typing, writing, image manipulation, creation of avatars, digital video and audio - 


===== PAGE 7 =====

7 
 
and engage in practices of everyday life at these interfaces" (Cyberethnography, para. 4). Resistance to 
analyzing the embodiment of online behavior stems at least partially from the characterization of digital life 
as requiring an eschewing of the physical, when in fact logging on to a computer and signing into a social 
media account by no means negates one’s physical experiences and is furthermore a continuation of one’s 
embodied, socially-constructed reality (Race in Cyberspace, para. 1). In the following analysis of online 
interaction, comments on blogs and references to social media are assumed to be the result of 
technologically mediated and enabled social practices rather than a metamorphosis from the purely 
physical to the disembodied virtual. This strain of interpretation is particularly apt in a discussion of the 
emotional and social stakes in virtual mourning, where at least two kinds of construction are at work: the 
online identities of deceased users are (re)constructed in new and different ways by those in a process of 
grieving for the lost, and as well, mourners construct themselves in relationship to loss through online 
participation. 
Methodology 
An online phenomenon requires analysis of online discourses. This paper focuses on 
conversations that have taken place in reaction to articles, announcements and blog posts disseminating 
information and expressing opinions about Facebook’s decisions related to policies on, access to and 
maintenance of profiles and pages of deceased site members. Articles were located by querying search 
engines for web pages related to Facebook’s policies on deceased site members. Texts were selected 
based on their coverage of Facebook’s policies and the presence of related discussions in comment 
forums. These virtual discourses, unfolding asymmetrically and presumably between strangers, are 
analyzed using the article or blog text as contextual background and the comments as the primary source 
of interpretation. A sample of individual quotes is positioned as illustrative of social negotiations of online 
protocols in response to death. The themes that emerge from these discussions speak to some of the 
tensions resulting from the emergence of online grief, as demonstrated by or performed in social media 


===== PAGE 8 =====

8 
 
sites. These discussions can be read as a hashing out of the technological protocols (Jenkins, 2006) 
arising from experiences with online grief. Following Jenkins (2006), protocols refer to “social and cultural 
practices that have grown up around … technology” (p. 13-14). As people have begun to spend an 
increasing amount of time establishing relationships through social media sites, the technological protocols 
resulting from these interactions are necessarily being adapted to include online grief. 
Locating this analysis on comments generated by articles about Facebook policies (rather than 
support forums, memorial pages or obituaries) is a choice that aims to engage online grief as an emergent 
and contested set of technological protocols being actively discussed and disputed in blog comments and 
community forums. This project assumes that memorial pages and support forums are primarily (but not 
exclusively) sites of online grief, while the texts discussed here are about online grief. Instead of centering 
analysis on discussions that have been set up as spaces to mourn specific individuals, these texts are 
intended to provide a space to discuss Facebook’s policies. The division between these two sets of 
dialogue is neither fixed nor impermeable, but the choice reflects an attempt to avoid opportunism of 
theorizing people’s private processes of mourning as well as an interest in focusing on how social media 
users think of and discuss policies of sites that form an increasingly important part of contemporary social 
relationships. 
Distinct from using blogs as a site of textual analysis, analysis of blog comments specifically is 
itself an evolving methodological approach. In their quantitative analysis of blog comments, Mishne and 
Glance (2006) wrote that “by overlooking comments, much of the conversation around many influential 
blogs is being missed” (p. 3). Mishne and Glance were largely interested in examining blog comments for 
the purpose of improving content-based search queries, but their observation that comments “provide 
access to a different perspective of weblog posts, namely, the impact on their readers” (p. 4) is quite 
relevant to an interpretive approach to understanding an online phenomenon through analysis of comments 
to blog posts and articles. A blog’s comments reflect the response of readers to a text, its reception among 


===== PAGE 9 =====

9 
 
its readers, creating an interactive conversation indicating the relevance, impact and import of a subject in 
readers’ lives. These discussions are informal, ongoing and vary widely in the level of analytical 
sophistication, but they provide a critical point of access to understanding how stakeholders are working 
through what it means to craft – and mourn – online selves. Computer-mediated discussions are thus used 
as a site of analysis for a computer-mediated social phenomenon. Research questions guiding this analysis 
include: What kinds of conversations are taking place online related to policies of social media sites and the 
deaths of site members? What can we learn (about community, mourning and online identity) from these 
discussions of online grief? 
Facebook’s Contentious Policies 
This analysis centers on Facebook’s policies regarding pages of site members who have died. 
Although originally limited to students at a set number of private high schools, membership is now open to 
anyone; currently, Facebook has more than 400 million active users, about 70% of whom are outside the 
United States. Half of Facebook’s active users log on in any given day, the average user has 130 friends 
and creates 70 pieces of content each month (all statistics from Facebook, 2010b). Facebook’s policy on 
the pages of deceased users has undergone serious changes in the company’s five-year history. Currently, 
Facebook requires proof of death to memorialize a user’s page, at which point “sensitive information” such 
as status updates are removed and profile access is restricted to confirmed friends (Kelly, 2009). At 
Facebook’s help center, users can report a deceased user, at which point a page is memorialized, or, if 
requested by immediate family, deleted. These policies are in contrast to the preexisting approach of 
deleting a profile one month after a user was reported as dead (Kelleher, 2007). 
The Facebook Blog elaborated on its policy in an October, 2009 blog post, in which the author Max 
Kelly explained, “we wanted to be able to model people’s relationships on Facebook, but how do you deal 
with an interaction with someone who is no longer able to log on? When someone leaves us, they don’t 
leave our memories or our social network” (para. 3). As of May 7, 2010, there were over 700 comments for 


===== PAGE 10 =====

10 
 
this post, ranging from personal requests for help to sharing memories of a friend who had passed away to 
extended descriptions of experiencing online grief. In terms of Metcalf and Huntington’s (1991) binary 
between individual and collective rituals of mourning as taking place through feedback, this comment forum 
provides a striking literalization of communicating conflict between personal experiences of loss and 
institutional direction as to the technological parameters in which grief can be expressed online. 
A number of comments responded to Kelly’s post in terms of resisting Facebook’s perceived 
heavy-handedness and unilateral approach: “i beleive you have no right to take control and think you 
should sort this out so other grieving people have a right to control whats going on [sic].” Similarly, another 
poster wrote, “I think it would be best to allow friends individually to grieve in whichever way they chose, 
rather than have a blanket solution for every person who dies on Facebook.” Although Facebook pages are 
homogenous in structure and design, their content reflects the user’s interests, identity and social ties, 
effectively creating an intensely individual collection of media objects representing and constructing the 
online self. Evidencing a concern for control over a Facebook member’s page content, and related to 
issues of conflict between various members of a user’s social sphere, one user responded to Kelly’s post 
by writing: “The biggest issue with your memorial policy seems to be its irrevocability. I don't know what 
should override: a poll of his friends may seem crass; allowing his family to make the decision doesn't solve 
the problem of disagreement. But either of those things seem like an improvement over the current 
system.” Here, Facebook’s policy is portrayed as problematic for its finality, which is perceived as being 
particularly disconcerting because of the emotional stakes at work as online rituals are being developed. 
Additionally, this remark suggests a kind of uneasiness as to Facebook’s policy in terms of technological 
protocols, where the half-hearted suggestion of a poll points to the possible roles of existing tools for 
communication that have emerged on social media sites (including quizzes, polls, pokes, status updates, 
broadcast messages, tags, group and event invitations and many others) being incorporated into online 
grief. Although this commenter voiced a conflicted sense of how best to use these tools in order to facilitate 


===== PAGE 11 =====

11 
 
virtual bereavement, for others these virtual acts of communication form an integral part of online 
interaction that seems to take on additional meaning after death. 
At stake in any of Facebook’s decisions about its members is the ownership and control of this 
intensely personal and individualized content. When issues ownership and control are complicated by the 
death of a user, pages of deceased site members can become even more contested sites of ownership 
over content, and by extension, the users’ online legacies. Although users in any context could foreseeably 
object to Facebook’s legal ownership of the material produced on its pages2, the death of a friend renders 
this ownership more immediate and emotional. Continuing to address issues of control over content, a 
source of conflict in response to Kelly’s post centered on whom among a deceased user’s social sphere 
should be allowed to make decisions about his or her page and profile. One poster described decisions 
made about her son’s page: “Someone, I'm assuming one of his friends, memorilized his page. Although as 
a family we appreciate that, we are still unsure of who decided to this [sic].” Decisions as to the 
maintenance over and access to a deceased user’s page is here not only an issue of user versus 
institution, but also among a user’s social circle; without the objective influence of traditional moderators for 
rituals of death (such as a funeral director), these conflicting interests become increasingly contested. 
A second theme that emerged from this discussion involved references to crafting, maintaining and 
preserving records of online relationships. Taking issue with Facebook’s policy, one poster commented, “for 
those of us who had connected profiles while that person was alive, we have a need to continue with that 
link, as it symbolizes some of our most personal parts of our relationship in a tangible way & we desire to 
maintain that link.” This reference to tangibility in the context of online interactions is a different (although 
perhaps related) articulation of Rybas and Gajjala’s (2007) claim as to the embodiment of participation 
                                                             
2 According to Facebook’s terms of service, users “own all of the content and information” posted on Facebook. However, for 
content considered intellectual property, including videos and photos, by creating an account, users grant Facebook “a non-
exclusive, transferable, sub-licensable, royalty-free, worldwide license to use any IP content that [is posted] on or in connection 
with Facebook,” (Facebook, 2010a). 


===== PAGE 12 =====

12 
 
online. Rather than simply seeing the act of being online as an embodied process, this post confers a kind 
of physicality on the collaborative construction of messages through Facebook, where continued access to 
a page allows this sense of physicality to endure after a user’s death. As one commenter wrote of a 
deceased user’s page: “it would be really sad if I would no longer be able to see his photo's and his 
postings. I hope I don't have to lose him again [sic].” This poster effectively conflates the digital media on 
someone’s page with the user himself, where losing access to those artifacts is itself constructed as a loss. 
Resulting from the time and energy spent crafting online profiles and maintaining relationships, a number of 
digital artifacts – including photos, polls, posts and conversations, the use of which can be called 
technological protocols – have emerged, both document and structure friendships. Having or gaining 
access to these artifacts after a user’s passing to some extent determines the possibility of grieving online, 
to participate in virtual displays of mourning and to return to media objects that formed a crucial part of 
online friendships. From this sample of comments, reactions to this explanation of official policy were 
varied, but as a whole, Kelly’s blog post provides a singular instance of interaction (although largely 
asymmetrical) between a Facebook administrator and Facebook users, where key tensions arose around 
the applicability of a universal policy to a diverse user group, issues of access to and control over content of 
a deceased user’s page, and the stakes of having these pages preserved. 
In the wake of Facebook’s 2009 decision to change its policy, a number of blogs and online 
magazines took up announcements on these decisions as a point of discussing issues of online identity 
and virtual grief. The following analysis looks at three such blog posts, ordered chronologically, as a sample 
of the points of conflict and discussion that have arisen around online grief, taking as a shared impetus 
Facebook’s announced policy decision about the pages of deceased users. 
A blog post on Brazen Careerist (2009), a social networking site geared towards young 
professionals, addressed the recent Facebook decision in terms of privacy and content ownership. The 
comments analyzed here suggest a deep connection to the preservation of online content for reasons that 


===== PAGE 13 =====

13 
 
include providing a site of contact between the deceased, grieving users and the actual content that 
sustained relationships prior to death, as well as assisting in the process of mourning. Adopting a 
somewhat personal tone, the author stated “it’s always chilling to read the words of someone who was 
once alive and now is dead. Especially when the internet is so alive and organic.” An interesting dichotomy 
present in this description is the position of death as a static marker of finality in the midst of an online 
environment that is perceived as fluid and constantly growing. In terminology from Rybas and Gajjala 
(2007), this characterization of a social media user’s death as something that gives pause to viewing the 
Internet as “alive” and “organic” underscores the extent to which online communities are interactive, 
communicative and embodied. Responding to this post, one commenter replied, “I gotta say that, it's sort of 
like a public journal and my opinions/comments/rants/posts all sort of belong to the organic public that I 
choose to associate with. If the profile and posts are deleted, it's kind of like deleting a part of other 
people's lives as well, since this is about a conversation.” Critical to this comment is the division between 
individual and community, where content is seen as belonging to the social sphere surrounding and 
interacting with a user. Although deleting or blocking access to this content might be motivated by a desire 
to respect and a virtual legacy, for this commenter, it does a disservice to the social circle who contributed 
to the deceased user’s page. As a result of this regular online contact, records of online participation are 
perceived as communal – rather than institutional or even personal – property. 
In terms of protocols of grief, this discussion suggests points of reconsideration of Metcalf and 
Huntington’s (1991) description of the ordering of notifications are being updated in a web 2.0 world. 
Discussing these protocols for notifying a community of a death, or collective rituals for mourning that 
death, one commenter explained the role that an online profile played in terms of organizing a friend’s 
funeral: “if her Facebook page weren’t still active many of us wouldn’t have known about the wake and the 
funeral … It seems kind of perverse to say, but Facebook brought all her friends closer when she was lost.” 
Although online notification of someone’s passing may obscure or disregard hierarchies of relationships to 


===== PAGE 14 =====

14 
 
the deceased, it also allows a wider circle of friends, family and acquaintances to participate in both online 
and offline grief. Beyond this, the reference to the perversity of generating a sense of intimacy through 
online social connections indicates the embodiment referenced by Rybas and Gajjala (2007), where the 
characterization of virtual activity as being embodied is underscored by the emotional and social ties at 
stake in these interactions and the protectiveness of online content. Resurfacing throughout these 
comments are conflicting reactions highlighting divisions between an individual user’s page and the 
surrounding online community, obligations to a user’s wishes versus those of family and friends, and 
questions of ownership of content in terms of the user, the institution and the family and friends. 
In his blog on technology and Asia, Crampton (2009) provided a summary of policies for several 
social media sites including Facebook, provoking a number of comments about the memorialization of 
online profiles. Perhaps because the site is more business oriented, many of the comments used corporate 
and legal language, as demonstrated by one commenter’s claim that “online identity is a personal estate” 
and a user questioning, “What happens to the digital legacy? … Very interesting case about ownership of 
digital identity.” These comments again point to issues of ownership, where the issue of memorialized 
pages brings to the forefront questions of what happens to the content produced online, who owns it, and 
how it is used. Instead of focusing explicitly on relationships between users on social media sites, virtual 
mourning here provides a motivation for thinking about the relationship between individual users, content 
and Facebook as an intermediary with claims to intellectual, virtual property. More personally, and perhaps 
somewhat contradictorily to posts discussed earlier, one commenter suggested that the rigidity of 
Facebook’s policy is something of a relief, where Facebook “resolves” issues of funeral planning, 
essentially replacing the detailed organization required for adhering to customs of traditional (and physical) 
funerals: “Facebook resolves this, since all your friends can meet at an agreed time, and say whatever they 
want. I think I am quite happy with this.” Rather than expressing an interest in maintaining individual control 
over virtual identity, this poster seems to take comfort in the decisions related to the maintenance of his 


===== PAGE 15 =====

15 
 
profile being pre-determined, as opposed to users who questioned the appropriateness of Facebook’s 
homogenous approach to a heterogeneous population. 
In an article for Newsweek’s online edition, Miller (2010) discussed Facebook’s policy in terms of 
managing online relationships. Discussing memorialized pages, Miller noted that “one might imagine such 
virtual mourning is shallow, but it’s not. Here is a real gathering place, where friends can grieve together – 
and where the deceased continues, in some sense to exist” (para. 3, emphasis mine). Returning to Metcalf 
and Huntington’s (1991) description of traditional spaces for mourning, memorialized page are described by 
Miller as providing an addition to or substitute for established sites of communal grief. Additionally, Miller’s 
suggestion that this “gathering place” allows friends to “grieve together” echoes claims from Neimeyer et al. 
(2002) that collective mourning provides a coping mechanism for making sense of loss. Given the need (or 
at least the psychosocial benefits) for having a shared site for coming to terms with death, and given the 
extent to which social media sites facilitating construct interpersonal relationships, it is perhaps unsurprising 
that social media users see Facebook pages as sites for online grief. These virtual rituals, however, are 
nonetheless a challenge, or at the very least a revising, of traditional modes of grief that existed in entirely 
physical ways, in some cases with funerary practices with histories dating back centuries. In this way, DIY 
mourning is not just a technological practice, it is also a social and cultural one. 
In response to Miller’s article, a commenter explained that in the wake of a friend’s death: “I 
needed [a friend’s] facebook page to remain, and have used it to grieve her death, because it was such a 
part of our life together. When you become close with someone in college, your facebook relationship is 
almost as real as your ‘real’ relationship.” Interestingly, this construction of online grief is tied directly to 
being in college, a distinction that’s increasingly likely to fade as Facebook’s user population continues to 
expand beyond its original age group. The commenter goes on to explain, “paying my respects on 
facebook feels like a more appropriate way to honor her life, and our friendship, than visiting her grave, for 
her physical resting place is unfamiliar and only serves to remind me of her tragic death.” This invocation of 


===== PAGE 16 =====

16 
 
familiarity is an important one in that Facebook becomes the habitual site for interaction with friends, and by 
extension the logical or appealing space for responding to news of a Facebook user’s passing. This 
familiarity is contrasted with the sense of removal or alienation from the traditional, physical sites of 
mourning, such as a cemetery. This commenter views traditional spaces of physic grief, those for wakes, 
funeral services and burials, as unfamiliar and foreign, in contrast to the intimate recognizability of a 
Facebook page. As a whole, this discussion demonstrates that death and mourning do not present a limit to 
personal investment on social media sites, and in fact, sites like Facebook offer useful, perhaps even 
critical, possibilities for coping, individually and collectively, with grief. 
Discussion 
An inherent danger in taking this methodological approach would be to suggest that sweeping or 
universal claims about online identity and mourning can be made by drawing on a limited number of 
comments in response to a sample of blogs and articles documenting changing policies of social media 
sites on the pages of deceased site members. This analysis is not intended to indicate that online mourning 
is motivated by a unanimously-shared set of beliefs sublimated into consistent practices. Rather, the aim of 
this paper is to look at the comments provoked by articles on this subject as a vibrant, although not always 
entirely coherent, discussion on the subject of online grief, which, as a still-developing practice3 highlights 
some of the ways that technological change is affecting interpersonal relationships and community. 
Themes from these discussions include ownership, privacy and collaborative creation of content, where 
users who devote a great deal of energy and time to online interaction feel intimate connections to and a 
degree of ownership over the profiles and pages of deceased friends and relatives. In terms of 
interpersonal relationships, the tensions that emerge from these texts can be positioned as dynamics of 
                                                             
3Perhaps predictably, online companies have emerged to offer a variety of services for managing online identity after death, 
including Death Swtich (http://deathswitch.com/), Legacy Locker (http://www.legacylocker.com), MyHeartwill 
(http://www.myheartwill.com) and the Vault (http://www.mylastsong.com), among others. The services offered by these vendors 
vary from information insurance to password security to creating media content to be sent to friends and family after death. Thus 
there is a commercialized version of creating tools and applications for monitoring online grief even as there are also developing 
social protocols. 


===== PAGE 17 =====

17 
 
institutions versus mourners, intramourner conflicts (as when there are disagreements between the 
deceased’s family and friends) and, fundamentally, between mourners and the mourned. An equalizing, 
uniting structure linking these dynamics is Facebook itself, with its provision of pages that are essentially 
identical in concept if highly differentiated in content. In the context of online grief, these pages become the 
contested site of ownership, meaning making and social ties. 
Social media sites are sometimes criticized for the presumed superficiality of relationships or 
flippancy of content that results from online interaction, and various scholars have attempted to verify or 
disprove these claims by positing theories to describe the meaning assigned to online interaction. Donath 
(2008) suggested that devoting time to online interaction displays a commitment to the maintenance of 
social ties. In Donath’s analysis, commenting on blog posts, rating videos and tagging photos are all 
displays of affective care for online relationships. In particular, Donath positions online interactions on 
social media sites in terms of fashion, or shifting trends of popularity that influence the use of technology 
(Fashion and the Display of Information-Based Status, para. 3). When commenters stressed wanting to 
maintain access to a friend’s page after his or her death, it can be read as wanting a platform for the 
continued display of care. Regarding public displays of bereavement, interactions with a deceased user’s 
profile signals continued care within his or her social circle, which can be displayed by posting on the user’s 
wall or creating a memorial page. These displays can furthermore be read as straddling both private and 
public rituals of mourning, where there is an interest both in arching previous records of signaled care and 
in having a space for collective grief, emphasized by Neimeyer et al. (2002) as a critical stage in mourning. 
Alternatively, Lange (2007) used the concept of media circuits (originally developed to discuss the 
use among migrant laborers of media objects to sustain relationships) to describe the use of YouTube 
videos to sustain relationships in social groups. In her paper, creating, sharing and interacting with 
YouTube videos enabled the maintenance of social ties in a close community; as a video circulated within a 
group, exchanging, commenting on and rating media offered ways of cementing social relationships. 


===== PAGE 18 =====

18 
 
Objections to the deletion of conversations between a deceased user and her friends can be read as a 
desire to preserve media objects. In this way, the user’s page becomes part of a media circuit that provides 
a valued point of connection within a user’s social community. Thus a social media site user’s page 
becomes a kind of social artifact, but continued interactions on the user’s page keep it from being a static 
one. It may in fact be that the very permanence and irrevocability of death contributes to the desire for a 
virtual space in which the deceased “lives on.” Required for that sense of continued presence is the ability 
to interact with an online profile in the same way as when a user was alive. Protectiveness over a user’s 
page signifies a commitment to the media circuit that both sustained friendships during a user’s life and 
connects mourners after death. 
In addition to these frameworks, there is also a potential analytical framing in terms of the 
participatory creation of content. Typically, participatory media refers to a shift in the production of content 
from institutions to individuals (Jenkins, 2006), an important, perhaps even democratizing force of creative 
energy that effectively dismantles corporate, hegemonic control of content. Mash-ups, fanvids, bit torrent 
sites – these tend to be cast as the domain of participatory media. In the discussions of online grief 
analyzed here, however, participation refers to something else, where users come together in a space and 
create conversations and interactions. The quotidian intimacy enclosed within those conversations 
generates a sense of ownership, and when sites like Facebook assert their claims to content (which is 
emotionally, as well as legally contested) in the wake of death, the reactions of Facebook users 
demonstrate a resistance to institutional control. As described by one user, removing access to a friend’s 
page after death can be seen as tantamount to deleting a socially-valued part of someone’s life. As a 
whole, DIY mourning can be seen as a kind of participatory media centered on communication, where new 
forms of social interaction are taking place outside of traditional manifestations of mourning. In this way, 
even the most ordinary forms of online participation are imbued with social significance in the context of 


===== PAGE 19 =====

19 
 
grief, where control over the records generated by these interactions touches on issues of collective 
ownership of collaborative content, community norms and virtual legacy. 
What we learn from careful analysis of online discussions on the subject of online grief is how 
meaning is being ascribed to practices of virtual bereavement even as the processes themselves are being 
shaped. The protocols related to online mourning are still being developed, the norms are still being 
collectively constructed, and the consequences for either following or violating these scripts are still in the 
process of being codified. As online grief continues to evolve, it will be a process that exposes fault lines of 
both social and technological protocols, a point of convergence between online and offline identities, 
individual users and collective rituals, cultural rituals and technological change. 
 


===== PAGE 20 =====

20 
 
 
References 
Crampton, T. (2009, June 30). Facebook after you die. Thomas Crampton Social Media in China and 
Across Asia. Retrieved from http://www.thomascrampton.com/silver-surfer/death-facebook-die-
lilian-edwards-sheffield/. 
Donath, J. (2008). Signals in social supernets. Journal of Computer-Mediated Communication, 13, 231-
251. 
Facebook (2010, April 22). Statement of rights and responsibilities. Retrieved from 
http://www.facebook.com/terms.php. 
Facebook (2010). Statistics. Press Room. Retrieved from http://www.facebook.com/press/ info .php? 
statistics. 
Gibson, M. (2007). Death and mourning in technologically mediated culture. Health Sociology Review, 
16(5), p. 415-424. 
Jenkins, H. (2006). Convergence culture. New York: NYU Press.  
K., O. (2009, February 23). Death & social media: Should Facebook remove your profile when you die? 
Brazen Careerist. Retrieved from http://www.brazencareerist.com/2009/02/21/death-social-media-
should-facebook-remove-your-profilewhen-you-die. 
Kelleher, K. (2007, February 22). Facebook profiles become makeshift memorials. Brown Daily Herald. 
Retrieved from http://media.www.browndailyherald.com. 
Kelly, M. (2010, October 26). Memories of friends departed endure on Facebook. The Facebook Blog. 
Retrieved from http://blog.facebook.com/blog.php?post=163091042130. 
Lange, P. G. (2007). Publicly private and privately public: Social networking on YouTube. Journal of 
Computer-Mediated Communication, 13(1). Retrieved from 
http://jcmc.indiana.edu/vol13/issue1/lange.html. 
Metcalf, P. & Huntington, R. (1991). Celebrations of death: The anthropology of mortuary ritual, 2nd ed. 
New York, NY: Cambridge, University Press. 
Miller, L. (2010, February 17). R.I.P. on Facebook: The uses and abuses of virtual grief. Newsweek. 
Retrieved from http://www.newsweek.com/id/233779/output/comments. 
Mishne, G. & Glance, N. (2006). Leave a reply: An analysis of weblog comments. Presented at WWW 
2006, May 22-26, 2006 Edinburgh. 
Neimeyer, R., Prigerson, H. & Davies, B. (2002). Mourning and meaning. American Behavioral Scientist, 
46; 235. 
Sanderson, J. and Cheong, P. (2010). Tweeting prayers and communicating grief over Michael Jackson 
online. Bulletin of Science Technology & Society, 30(5) 328-340. 
Rybas, N. & Gajjala, R. (2007). Developing cyberethnographic research methods for understanding digitally 
mediated identities. Forum Qualitative Sozialforschung/Forum: Qualitative Social Research, 8(3). 
Retrieved from http://nbnresolving.de/urn:nbn:de:0114-fqs0703355. 
Williams, A. & Merten, M. (2009). Adolescents’ online social networking following the death of a peer. 
Journal of Adolescent Research, 24(1), 67-90. 
