ID: B04
DOI: 10.1177/1461444819854731
中文译名: 通过算法传闻管理YouTube可见性
英文原题: Managing visibility on YouTube through algorithmic gossip
原文件: 文献全文/正文/B04_2019_通过算法传闻管理YouTube可见性__Managing visibility on YouTube through algorithmic gossip.pdf
源URL: https://kclpure.kcl.ac.uk/ws/files/139130145/Managing_visibility_on_YouTube_BISHOP_Acc14_May2019Epub15Jun2019_GREEN_AAM.pdf
提取说明: 仅为机械文本提取，页码标记依原PDF；不代表已完成论证核验。


===== PAGE 1 =====

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
King’s Research Portal 
DOI:
10.1177/1461444819854731
Document Version
Peer reviewed version
Link to publication record in King's Research Portal
Citation for published version (APA):
Bishop, S. (2019). Managing visibility on YouTube through algorithmic gossip. New Media and Society, 21(11-
12), 2589-2606. https://doi.org/10.1177/1461444819854731
Citing this paper
Please note that where the full-text provided on King's Research Portal is the Author Accepted Manuscript or Post-Print version this may
differ from the final Published version. If citing, it is advised that you check and use the publisher's definitive version for pagination,
volume/issue, and date of publication details. And where the final published version is provided on the Research Portal, if citing you are
again advised to check the publisher's website for any subsequent corrections.
General rights
Copyright and moral rights for the publications made accessible in the Research Portal are retained by the authors and/or other copyright
owners and it is a condition of accessing publications that users recognize and abide by the legal requirements associated with these rights.
•Users may download and print one copy of any publication from the Research Portal for the purpose of private study or research.
•You may not further distribute the material or use it for any profit-making activity or commercial gain
•You may freely distribute the URL identifying the publication in the Research Portal
Take down policy
If you believe that this document breaches copyright please contact librarypure@kcl.ac.uk providing details, and we will remove access to
the work immediately and investigate your claim.
Download date: 17. Aug. 2026


===== PAGE 2 =====

 
1
Managing Visibility on YouTube through Algorithmic Gossip 
Accepted 14/05/2019  
 
Abstract  
Beauty vloggers’ feminised outputs often position them outside of the technical, however, 
their strategic management of algorithmic visibility makes them an illuminating source of 
algorithmic knowledge. I draw from an ethnography of beauty vloggers and industry 
stakeholders, and interviews with 10 full time beauty vloggers, to study the collaborative and 
directive processes used to formulate and sustain algorithmic expertise – algorithmic gossip. 
Algorithmic gossip is defined as communally and socially informed theories and strategies 
pertaining to recommender algorithms, shared and implemented to engender financial 
consistency and visibility on algorithmically structured social media platforms. Gossip is 
productive: talk informs and supports practices such as uploading frequently and producing 
feminised beauty content to perform more effectively on the platform. Taking gossip 
seriously can present a valuable resource for revealing information about algorithms, in 
addition to making how perceptions of algorithms inform content production visible.  
 
Introduction 
This article studies the collaborative and directive processes employed by beauty vloggers 
to formulate and sustain algorithmic visibility. Technically, algorithms lay out the guiding 
processes for mechanical problem solving and decision making (Dourish, 2016; Gillespie, 
2017). Algorithms are used by YouTube to solve two core problems: managing a growing 
mass of video content, and satisfying audiences, who hope to be served relevant 
entertaining, educational or informative videos. Algorithms are thus used to answer (and 
enact) the question; what should be made visible, and to whom? In the context of this paper, 
algorithms are defined as the codified step by step processes implemented by YouTube to 
afford or restrict visibility. In practice visibility is afforded by the platform in several ways; it is 
“constructed and shaped” through “personalised and social algorithms for search and front 
page layout, algorithmic search, and features like autoplaying ‘related videos’” (Burgess & 
Green, 2018: 53). It is ultimately through these limited algorithmically informed affordances 
that YouTube that will aggregate YouTubers’ audiences and promote their content (Postigo, 
2014). To understand the exigent theories and strategies used by content creators to 
negotiate and maintain visibility on YouTube, this paper focuses its attention to beauty 
vloggers (video bloggers). So far, YouTube beauty communities have been examined as 
they curate micro celebrity (Senft, 2008) and perform entrepreneurship (Duffy, 2017), and 
intimately connect with their followers (García-Rapp, 2017). They have not yet been 
examined for their technical strategies and algorithmic expertise. 
 
The research on algorithmic knowledge production generally falls into two camps. The first 
investigates ‘technical’ sites, such as recommender systems and tech organisations, to 
examine how algorithms are constructed (e.g. Dourish, 2016; Hallinan & Striphas, 2016; 
Seaver, 2017; Vonderau, 2019). This research interrogates those who have sanctioned 
expertise and technical knowledge. A second body of work investigates everyday 
interactions with algorithms, often through interviews or surveys. They highlight how 
functional theories on algorithmic processes are built despite users’ ostensive lack of 
technical knowledge (e.g. Bucher, 2017; DeVito, Gergle, & Birnholtz, 2017; Eslami et al., 
2016; Myers West, 2018). The binary approach of this research does not capture the 
knowledge of platform producers; neither a platform employee or an everyday user, these 
producers’ income depends on successfully negotiating visibility on proprietary platforms. As 
such producers, beauty vloggers are sources of algorithmic knowledge whose feminised 
output positions them outside of the technical, yet whose work is contingent on algorithmic 
visibility. Their knowledge about algorithmic processes is shared and enlivened through 
gossip, defined as loose, unmethodical talk that is generative: gossip lies at the “median 
point between random and agenda-driven” (Adkins, 2002: 216). Not only is gossip an 


===== PAGE 3 =====

 
2
important and under-studied form of knowledge production, it is “embedded in traditional 
ways of knowledge production” (Adkins, 2002: 223). Gossip, particularly when associated 
with women, is dismissed for its bias, intimacy or as violation of privacy (McRobbie, 1982). 
Yet, gossip is an important resource and method for knowledge-exchange, particularly for 
marginalised groups. In this vein, I define algorithmic gossip as communally and socially 
informed knowledge about algorithms and algorithmic visibility.  
 
Detailed information on how platform visibility is determined is often unavailable to content 
creators. In part this is due to practicality; there is no straightforward way of explaining how 
machine learning algorithms, often constructed across organisational silos, work (Crawford, 
2016; Seaver, 2017). Secondly, platforms release limited instruction on visibility to maintain 
a “competitive advantage”, as they fear content creators “gaming” the algorithm (Kitchin, 
2017: 20). Despite such methodological challenges, some academic works have ventured 
claims about how aspects of the YouTube algorithm function. For example Bernhard Rieder 
et al. systematically studied YouTube’s search results to illuminate the platform’s “ranking 
cultures” (Rieder et. al, 2018: 52). The authors found that fresh news and trending issues 
were more likely to be surfaced on YouTube. Although fruitful to a certain extent, this work 
inherently limited, as YouTube does not provide reliable access to key data and metrics that 
inform its recommendation algorithms. Due to the changeable and proprietary nature of 
YouTube’s algorithmic cultures, both academics and content creators cannot know for 
certain why videos are (or are not) widely promoted, or how to ensure content gains (and 
sustains) visibility. Thus, the emotional and financial implications of ensuring and 
maintaining visibility is profound for content creators, as visibility informs both income and 
opportunities.  
 
Managing algorithmic visibility can be understood as part of (often un-compensated) 
“aspirational labour” as influencers build careers via social media presence (Duffy, 2017: 9). 
This paper sustains a focus on full time vloggers, or those who successfully attain a 
meaningful portion of their income from YouTube. These actors are making content for a 
career. The risk of losing visibility, and income, is high. In this context, maintaining complicity 
with YouTube’s changeable organisational culture is an ongoing project. This paper 
addresses growing concerns about how cultural producers navigate the increasingly 
algorithmic nature of content distribution (Hallinan & Striphas, 2016; Willson, 2017). Content 
creators must manage the risk of invisibility as they increasingly work in precarious fields of 
cultural production that are specific to, and contingent upon, social media platforms.  
 
Optimising for Platforms  
Vlogging represents political economic changes in cultural industries as production and 
distribution become increasingly reliant upon social media platforms. For David Nieborg and 
Thomas Poell, cultural production has been fundamentally altered by the social, institutional 
and economic penetration of social media platforms into cultural life. They define 
“platformization” as the need for cultural producers to be visible for platform-specific 
contexts, or how “producers… are impelled to develop publishing strategies that are aligned 
with the business models of platforms” (Nieborg & Poell, 2018: 8). The production of content 
is now partly structured by what is (and is not) permitted on platforms. More specifically, 
there are growing motivations for producers to render themselves “algorithmically 
recognisable” and “orient themselves toward these algorithmic systems” if they are 
interested in having their content defined as ‘relevant’ and surfaced audiences (Gillespie, 
2017: 2). Platforms’ definitions of relevance do affect the strategies and tactics of content 
producers. However, platforms also update and shift their algorithms according to their 
business priorities, shaping what is seen and engaged with without users’ consent or 
knowledge (Bucher, 2018).  
Because of this constant shifting, algorithms have been framed as a ‘black box’ wherein their 
processes are opaque, secret and hidden. The ‘black box’ can thus be a methodological 


===== PAGE 4 =====

 
3
limitation, but also a creative methodological starting point (Seaver, 2017; Ziewitz, 2016). In 
this vein, Taina Bucher positions the black box as a “red herring” (Bucher, 2016: 94). She 
argues that ostensive algorithmic black boxes should not preclude researchers from 
researching algorithms through autoethnography, or resources such as press, PR and 
patent applications. By triangulating diverse sources, we can look beyond a “fetishization” of 
algorithms, where they are embedded with unaccountable magical powers, to examine their 
hybridity and embeddedness in social life (Crawford, 2016: 89). I join these authors in 
arguing there is a need to research algorithms creatively, to study the complex relationships 
between cultural producers, platforms and algorithmic practice.  
 
The figure of the black box remains culturally significant for content producers as it 
represents the “mystification” of how social media platforms work, and in turn how they 
navigate them (Striphas, 2015: 406). In her work, Taina Bucher observes that ordinary users 
address gaps in their understandings of everyday algorithmic systems through the 
“algorithmic imaginary” (Bucher, 2017). Algorithmic imaginaries guide how individuals 
engage with algorithms, often prompted by exceptional moments when an algorithmic 
recommendation is either a little bit too accurate or jarringly inaccurate. Similarly, Motahhare 
Eslami et al., have also investigated users’ understandings of “invisible algorithms”, studying 
Facebook users, and finding “perceived knowledge about the algorithm can affect their 
behaviour”; they term these understandings “folk theories” (Eslami et al., 2016: 1). The 
authors demonstrate how folk theories can be directive: users can inventively draw attention 
to what (they believe) are instances of algorithmic bias on social media platforms. 
Breakdowns in trust often causes participants’ attention to be directed towards unpicking 
how the system works. My empirical approach builds on this work, highlighting how users 
manage and navigate algorithms that they cannot know or understand. The mystification 
surrounding algorithms is productive: a lack of information informs a perception of risk, and 
informs collaborative negotiation of risk. 
 
Both imaginaries and folk theories can be collaborative and directive, but arguably more 
attention could be paid to how theories are employed and deployed by professional content 
producers to assist them with their work. To this end, Kelley Cotter examines a number of 
algorithmic strategies undertaken by aspiring and successful Instagram influencers, which 
she defines as “playing the visibility game” (Cotter, 2018: 1). She demonstrates how 
understandings of the algorithm blend with existing logics of authenticity and 
entrepreneurship to shape influencers’ practice. For example, they interact heavily with 
followers or simulate interactions through strategic following and bots, because they believe 
this will increase visibility (Cotter, 2018: 11). However, what is missed in this approach is a 
detailed account of how influencers’ collaborative and publicly shared experiences, 
assumptions and theories inform productive norms. In this vein, I argue such needs to be 
situated within a historical context of cultural production. Cultural production has long been a 
process of managing uncertainty and risk; risk in this sense is often concerned with the 
unpredictability of audience reception, and ensuring return on valuable financial investments 
(Meehan, 1986; Ryan, 1992; Saha, 2018). Risk management often results in the 
reproduction of a small pool of stereotyped and generic content, that often sustains societal 
inequalities and invisibilities. This perspective affords an examination of how theories are 
contextualised, shared and enlivened by diverse stakeholders, to make cultural production 
manageable. Anamik Saha (2018) outlines a process of “rationalisation” or how hegemonic 
and racialised logics of production find their way into cultural production through “processes, 
apparatus, rationales and logics that are embodied in each stage of production” (Saha, 
2018: 138). This approach is imperative for accounting for how understandings of 
organisational structure and processes of social interaction inform the content produced for 
platforms such as YouTube. A further useful perspective is “industry lore”, defined as a 
“sense making strategy” that ultimately arranges the messiness of cultural production into a 
shared and “coherent world view” (Havens, 2014: 50). This concept can support analysis of 
how content production for platforms is not ‘top down’ or ‘bottom up’. Rather, it is informed 


===== PAGE 5 =====

 
4
by disparate assemblages of information, assumptions and risk-management strategies. 
What remains unsettled is how logics are shared or made through informal talk within 
platform-contingent media industries. The following analysis investigates how connected, 
subversive and collaborative talk informs theories about what ‘works’ for YouTube, and thus 
influences strategies implemented towards attaining visibility. Gossip remains under-
researched in this context, particularly as it is used to manage risk and impacts cultural 
production.  
Gossip  
Organisational studies research on gossip can serve as a useful starting point to understand 
the function of gossip as knowledge production. For example, Waddington (2012) points out 
that “organisational gossip is a relational, reflexive communicative practice through which 
individuals engage in sensemaking and knowing” (Waddington, 2012: 2). She takes a broad 
approach to defining gossip, attempting to shepherd multiple forms of reflexive evaluative 
talk under this umbrella. However, feminist accounts of gossip demonstrate how the term 
has multiple negative connotations, and thus can be ignored for a number of reasons. 
Firstly, gossip is unruly and difficult to track. As feminist scholar Angela McRobbie observes, 
“in the use of words, the tension arises between the anarchy and all-pervasiveness of talk 
and the order and formality of written words. We all talk, all of the time” (McRobbie, 1982: 
50). McRobbie argues that women’s forms of talk, of knowledge-sharing, are located outside 
of institutionally sanctioned research practices, and are under-observed, and ghettoized. 
Similarly, Adkins argues oral histories are often considered “trivial” compared to the “real 
stuff” of research – but argues that this distinction is ultimately “false” (Adkins, 2002: 215). 
For Adkins draws attention to the erased role of talk in scientific or mathematic discovery, 
arguing “womens ways of knowing are simply part of how all humans come to knowledge” 
(Adkins, 2002: 215).  Taking talk seriously enables us to synthesise algorithmic studies with 
accounts of gossip to make visible how knowledge about algorithms is often not verifiable, 
but informs how beauty vloggers navigate and manage visibility on YouTube. 
 
This paper points to three primary functions of algorithmic gossip. Firstly, I consider 
algorithmic gossip as a collective resource for knowledge-production; I outline how vlogging 
communities utilise directive and interested gossip as a significant and collaborative method 
of understanding and mapping algorithmic changes. Secondly, I consider algorithmic gossip 
as subversive, as a response to a highly uneven power relationship between cultural 
producers and the platforms they work on. These primary sections consider how gossip 
occurs: namely, who gossips and why. In the final section of this paper I examine how 
gossip about algorithms can be applied as a methodology – how gossip can be utilized as 
data on how algorithms work and what they do.  
 
Methodology 
The production of media texts is influenced by economic, social and cultural processes. In 
this vein, the experiences, self-presentations and labours of YouTubers are not exclusively 
represented in content posted on their YouTube channels. My methodology encompasses 
three years of immersion into a “messy web” of vloggers’ participation on numerous social 
networks, and in ‘offline’ spaces (Postill & Pink, 2012). I conducted semi-structured 
interviews, ‘online’ ethnography across platforms, ‘offline’ ethnography at vlogging events 
and qualitative analysis of YouTube’s promotional materials. I coded my data set in an 
instrumental sense, namely to summarise, identify and organise themes and genres in the 
corpus, field notes and interview transcripts. Examples of codes included beauty, ‘get ready 
with me’ videos, authenticity, anxiety, depression.  
 Although I believe the experiences of aspiring vloggers are significant to study, I wanted to 
investigate the stakes of algorithmic visibility for vloggers who are reliant on the platform for 
a significant portion of their income. I interviewed ten British beauty and lifestyle vloggers in 
addition to nine vlogging industry intermediaries, including talent agents, Twitter’s 


===== PAGE 6 =====

 
5
community manager for the UK and Europe and the (then) Director of the Internet Creators 
Guild, an international organisation intended to promote and support full time content 
creators. Each interview lasted between thirty minutes and three hours. Three of the content 
creators I interviewed had vlogged full time previously, but currently attained a part-time 
wage from their vlog. I also interviewed one ex full-time vlogger who had since ceased 
producing content on YouTube. 
In my ‘online’ ethnography, conducted between 2015 and 2018, I identified and followed 
upwards of 30 UK based beauty vloggers with a minimum of 10,000 subscribers on 
YouTube. 10,000 subscribers is the minimum requirement for engagement with YouTube’s 
creator services and affords access to facilities such as the YouTube Space Creator Café 
and Creator Days. Beauty vloggers with 10,000 + subscribers have thus achieved a 
monetizable status that signals their ‘A List’ visibility (YouTube, 2019). Subscribers hold a 
high currency within the YouTube industry, as they point to individual career sustainability, 
whereas other visibility metrics such as views are seen as fluctuant and easily inflated  
(García-Rapp, 2017a). Subscribers are also visible in the platforms’ architecture and are 
thus bound up with beauty vloggers’ brands and symbolic capital. Communities very rarely 
stay, and their experiences are very rarely experienced on one site, platform or space. 
Research must account for the mobility of users and audiences across different offline and 
online spaces (Postill & Pink, 2012). Following vloggers across platforms allowed me to 
study the themes, genres, relationships, content and track scandals and events. 
Algorithmic gossip as collaborative  
A central component of gossip is how it functions as “a collective narrative” (Adkins, 2002: 
216). Within algorithmic gossip, knowledge is shared and collectively built: observations 
about individualised experiences of algorithmic (in)visibility are highlighted and enlivened 
through discussion and debate. The collaborative nature of theory-building and sharing can 
be formalised: an example of an institutionalised channel for algorithmic gossip is the 
Internet Creators Guild (ICG), a non-union, non-profit organisation established in 2016 by 
vlogger Hank Green. The ICG is designed to support hopeful creators through connection – 
their website boasts the prominent strapline “we bring creators together in order to make 
their profession more sustainable” (ICG, 2019). ICG membership strongly supports vloggers 
contributing experiences and  knowledge to the organisation. They offer a “Platform 
Changelog”, based on “gathered experiences” and “shared expertise”, observations and 
experiences that are unconfirmed by YouTube (ICG, 2019). The changelog is distributed to 
with ICG membership, which ranges between $75-$500 per year.  Although the Changelog 
promises a curatorial and edited resource, adding a layer of organisational sanction to pure 
unsanctioned gossip, it ultimately funnels individual observations of algorithmic events and 
changes to interested parties, contributing to a disseminated pool of unofficial and 
unsanctioned gossipy knowledge.  
In interviews many beauty vloggers told me that they could not afford ICG membership fees, 
which are particularly untenable when YouTube channels are in their infancy. For example, 
Lucy, a lifestyle vlogger told me:  
I haven't paid because when it first started I had no money. I was a student and I 
wasn't doing it full time so I was like... sorry guys! …  I'm not a part of ICG, I don't 
know anything about algorithm changes if they happen.  
 
Vloggers without support negotiate algorithmic uncertainties through ad-hoc communal 
spaces. In a typical approach, Amy, a part time beauty vlogger, gleans information “mostly 
from disgruntled friends and acquaintances, either in person or on social media”, particularly 
in moments of algorithmic disruption as “YouTube’s stance is very much that it’s not an 
issue, it’s not happening”. I will attend to the level of antagonism with YouTube in the 


===== PAGE 7 =====

 
6
following section; for now it is important to acknowledge that many beauty vloggers gathered 
information about the algorithm through informal messaging and Facebook groups, which 
underscore the intimacy of algorithmic gossip in two ways. Firstly, closed groups create the 
conditions for clandestine knowledge-production as they are structured according to 
celebrity status and subscriber volumes. Access is often restricted to those who meet certain 
requirements. For example, Melanie, a popular UK beauty vlogger told me “we have got a 
Facebook group, which is really nice support, just with other YouTubers who kind of do full 
time stuff, and if we ever have a really big issue we can just go there”. It is important to note 
that attaining ‘full time’ YouTube income necessitates a significant fan base, and often 
celebrity status. Cultural studies theorists have pointed out that ‘full time’ influencers who 
make monetizable content tend to reinforce each other’s star status and skew towards white 
actors with myriad intersections of privilege (Bishop, 2018; Duffy, 2017). Gossip in such 
spaces, then, reinforces boundaries between insiders and outsiders (Waddington, 2012). 
Even Facebook groups for aspiring creators have protective requirements for those who 
want to join. For example, the London Small YouTubers Facebook Group is closed. Entry 
requires demonstrating evidence that participants live locally and have a regularly updated 
YouTube channel. The likelihood of acceptance, even for those fitting these requirements, 
also increases depending on being ‘known to’ the group and holding established social links 
to demonstrate ones authentic YouTube status.  
The second level of intimacy sustained by algorithmic gossip is how it operates as a form of 
test for ideas exchanged between compatriots, before they become formal pieces of 
information. Lifestyle vlogger, Astrid, described how vloggers use messaging groups to take 
the temperature of algorithmic visibility on YouTube, and to check in and assess if others are 
experiencing the same events or issues: “YouTubers talk to each other a lot, and we'll be 
like, ‘are you having a terrible week too?’.. and so it's like OK, and that's kinda how we talk 
to each other about it”. Vloggers draw from friendships and relationships to plot maps of 
individual algorithmic experiences among friends. Messaging groups are thus trial spaces 
where vloggers can post issues, experiences and articulate the success or failures of their 
recent videos. Adkins notes that gossip is useful as it helps us run a “background check” on 
potential beliefs (Adkins, 2002: 224). Conversational exchanges in closed groups are used 
to diagnose experiences as either personal or platform-wide, as algorithmic changes 
implemented by YouTube can have significant effects for those reliant on the platform for 
income but are not announced or confirmed through official channels (Bucher, 2018). Of 
course, a methodological limitation of gossip is that it is closed, intimate and hard to track in 
nature. The closed nature of groups limits the ethnographers’ exposure to intimate talk, 
beyond the snippets confided in interviews. Vloggers frequently shared their theories with 
me, which were often prefaced with cautionary precursors such as ‘I feel like’ and ‘in my 
opinion’. 
 
On occasion, temperature-taking conversations about algorithmic visibility can also take 
place in public forums such as Twitter amongst popular and connected vloggers. In one 
example of such a twitter exchange, lifestyle vlogger Sophie Eggleton announced that she 
had produced a high volume of YouTube videos in the last month, an announcement that 
was met by encouragement and compliments by other YouTubers, celebrating her work 
ethic. In a self-deprecating response, Eggleton tweeted that she was concerned her videos 
sustained “quantity over quality” (Eggleton, 2016). Zoe London, a popular UK lifestyle 
vlogger reassured her that this would not affect her channel negatively, responding “there's 
something in the YouTube playbook about how the algorithm rewards you for uploading 
15 min of content a week” (London, 2016). In the process of this public interaction, 
assumptions about what YouTube values, and what it requires of content creators, 
travels widely. This conversation demonstrates an opportunity for collaboratively building 
theories about algorithmic changes and alterations. Not only do vloggers share their theories 
between themselves (that YouTube rewards frequent posting), but with their broad following. 
Beauty vloggers also often commented publicly on what they perceived as algorithmic 


===== PAGE 8 =====

 
7
failures; in one example, popular vlogger Tanya Burr bemoaned her YouTube visibility in a 
tweet “When you spend so much time making videos you love and are excited for people 
to see and then the YouTube algorithm messes it up” (Burr, 2016). Taking this tweet at 
face value, Burr here is venting about her experiences of production contingent on a social 
media platform’s recommender algorithmic. However,  as a self-branding exercise, this 
tweet, can also be read as public performance to curate a specific form of online attention, in 
other words a strategic example of “visibility labour” (Abidin, 2016). For example, this tweet 
also serves as a public reminder to her fans to check on her YouTube videos, reminding 
them that the ‘algorithm’ will not always serve them easily. This tweet generated myriad 
responses from concerned fans and fellow creators, checking in and offering support.  
 
 
Algorithmic gossip, knowledge requests and algorithmic auditing 
Carly Rowena is a UK based full-time fashion, fitness and lifestyle vlogger. In an Instagram 
Story in 2018 she asked audiences to weigh in on the visibility of one of her recent YouTube 
videos. She asked: “Was [this video] in your sub box?”, offering two reply options: “Yes!” or 
“I didn’t see it!”. The ‘sub box’ in this instance refers to a subscriber inbox, a dedicated space 
in which users can find videos from YouTuber channels that they are subscribed to. 
Previously, inclusion in subscribers’ inboxes was guaranteed: YouTube content for 
subscribed channels was hosted here. However, at the outset of 2018 many believed that 
YouTube was starting to introduce algorithmic curation to this feature, meaning content 
creators could no longer rely on the subscriber inbox for video promotion. Crucially, no-one 
was sure. The idea that YouTube has poor communicative channels with creators is held by 
industry intermediaries. For the (then) Director of the Internet Creators Guild, Laura 
Cherinkoff, it was apparent that the lack of transparency has been a major concern for 
YouTube creators, “in general creators, I think… really don't understand why YouTube does 
certain things or have a say, or get their questions answered or their problems fixed”. Beauty 
vloggers , also, articulated how YouTube does not address creators’ concerns: Amy 
remarked “going to [YouTube] is about as useful as a chocolate teapot”. Another high-profile 
beauty vlogger told me in more absolute terms that contacting YouTube about algorithmic 
changes is useless “they are absolutely insistent it doesn't happen. You can send them 
fucking screenshots”. 
 
To address uncertainty on how frequently her videos were promoted to her subscribers’ 
inboxes, Carly Rowena’s employed a ‘poll,’ a technical feature of Instagram stories that 
allows viewers to publicly ‘vote’ on numerous options. This is a savvy use of an Instagram 
affordance to crowdsource information about YouTube visibility. Her request for information 
is undercut by a specific performance of authenticity and amateurism. The background 
image of Carly Rowena’s Instagram poll featured a blurred image of her dog being given a 
bath, supporting a reading of the post as intentionally authentic and everyday. References to 
banal moments and everyday life are used by content creators to neutralise professionalism 
overt or hawkish business strategy (Abidin, 2017). In this post curated ordinariness is 
supports algorithmic gossip; the everyday and the domestic are sites where gossip happens, 
where sense is made and shared.  
 
Similarly using another platform to probe uncertainty around YouTube’s subscriber inboxes, 
sardonic American beauty vlogger Rachel Levin requested: “Tweet me pictures of your 
subscription boxes from like 12 PM today if you’re subscribed to me” (Levin, 2017). This 
tweet returned 41 fan images, many tangential from the initial request, for example “It’s my 
birthday”. Fans conversed back and forth in the tweet’s replies, translating Levin’s ‘12PM 
today’ their own time-zones. Loose conversation here was mixed with snippets of data and 
algorithmic ‘proof’ as fans shared images are shared of their subscription boxes from 
multiple countries and cultural contexts. These screen grabs can serve as evidence of 
algorithmic tests and alterations. YouTube did not officially confirm the changes to 


===== PAGE 9 =====

 
8
subscription inboxes, yet, evidence of the alterations can be found nestled within fan images 
in response to Levin’s tweets. The examples demonstrate how gossip patches holes in 
algorithmic knowledge through intimacy and close connections, for example colleagues and 
fans. Requests for information hinge on a familiarity with the vlogger and their output. They 
are colloquial and conversational; they are presented as relaxed requests between friends. 
Rachel Levin did not qualify or justify her appeal for images.  
 
Requests for information, and the responses given, are gossip. They are broadly interested, 
intimate and at the margins of sanctioned industry discourse: knowledge is shared about 
topics that are slippery and unconfirmed. If gossip is “about the absent”, algorithmic gossip is 
the strategic use of resources to piece together information in the absence of official platform 
communication (Adkins, 2002: 216). In practice, this is undertaken through the strategic use 
of secondary platforms to cross-reference and monitor algorithmic visibility for diverse 
audiences. Such approaches have roots in “algorithmic auditing”, which Sandvig defines as 
borrowing from “field experiments in which researchers or their confederates participate in a 
social process that they suspect to be corrupt in order to diagnose harmful discrimination” 
(Sanvig et al. 2014: 5). Yet, for beauty vloggers and content creators more broadly, their 
participation in algorithmic culture is not an experiment. Diagnoses are not undertaken 
independently, they are enlivened by social forces. They constantly monitor, share and 
source information to diagnose algorithmic recipes and patterns in the context of their 
everyday occupation. Vloggers levy intimacy and close ties with their audience to solicit data 
about algorithmic reach. Although technical knowledge becomes mixed up with exigent and 
ancillary remarks, for example from fans about their birthdays, talk can serve as key data 
that influences content and algorithmic optimization strategies.    
 
Algorithmic gossip as subversive  
Grace Victory is a mixed-race beauty vlogger with a direct yet warm conversational manner, 
informing her self-branding as the ‘internet’s big sister’. On her channel, Victory has 
produced several videos discussing her frustrating and negative experiences with the 
YouTube algorithm. She argues YouTube’s algorithms prioritise and sustain the links 
between white users’ channels, reinforcing white visibility. In one video, entitled “Does 
YouTube Discriminate?” Victory answers fan questions about racism on YouTube. Victory 
expresses her delight at a question asked by a fan about discrimination on YouTube, raising 
her hand and crying “Yes! Yes, yes, yes”. She explains: 
If you look at the top 50 YouTubers… the majority if not all of them are white middle 
class people…. it’s just YouTube pushes them through the algorithms, and one 
person can make a video and the other recommended is people who look and talk 
like them (Victory, 2018) 
As exemplified in this answer to the fan question, race and social justice are key themes that 
are recurrent on Victory’s channel. She documents racism on YouTube through disclosing 
her personal affective responses to her everyday social experiences. In a typical example, 
Victory documents a trip to a local music festival in a video blog. In the latter half of the video 
she lies on her bed as she tearfully draws parallels between her work ethic and her lack of 
success. She informs her audience that her tears were prompted by bumping into other 
popular YouTubers at the festival, who had treated her poorly. She theorises why she feels 
bad about this interaction; “I work really hard… and it makes me think, like, is anybody going 
to make it whose like not already from like a well-off background… who’s well spoken? Is it 
because I’m like not white”. Consistent with the “algorithmic imaginary”, Victory imagines the 
wider context of YouTube, including its algorithms (Bucher, 2017). She maps her 
experiences and makes sense of them through an affective lens. With the resources 
available to her, Victory cannot truly evidence that she has been discriminated against. She 
can only reflect on her experiences and how this feels. 


===== PAGE 10 =====

 
9
Although Victory can not prove discrimination, algorithms do often sustain bias towards 
marginalised people (Eubanks, 2017). Specifically, Safiya Noble’s (2018) argues Google 
(YouTube’s parent company) perpetuates algorithmic bias towards women of colour. For 
Noble, prioritisation of commercial and advertising needs often conflicts with Google’s 
positioning as a media, news and information source; ultimately, for Noble, “marginalised 
people are exponentially harmed” (Noble, 2018: 28). In this vein, the lens through which 
Google’s algorithms operate locate whiteness as normality and thus black women’s 
representations, experiences and self-presentations become othered. The observations 
echo a nascent yet growing body of academic work that points out YouTube’s tendency to 
disproportionately promote white content creators (Gaunt, 2015; Oh & Oh, 2017). To value 
Victory’s work as algorithmic gossip means taking into account the how theories are built 
through everyday connections, questions, interactions and consultations. As Victory shares 
her observations, they can travel as gossip, which are discussed in the video comments. 
Through a reflexive rhetoric, she presents a convincing case, making visible the narrative 
contexts about why she believes in algorithmic discrimination on YouTube. Scola Donda a 
black UK based beauty and fitness vlogger articulates the challenge in making discrimination 
on YouTube visible to white audiences. She observes “people who get opportunities or who 
get pushed on YouTube, and stuff like that, they all tend to be white creators. Now this is a 
tricky topic to talk about because most people don’t see it” (Dondo, 2017).  
Algorithm gossip has been selected as a framework, because gossip has long been a tool 
for countering power and facilitating resistance. Defining “deep gossip”, Abelove describes 
the value of underground talk as “an indispensable resource for those who are in any sense 
or measure disempowered… [touching] on matters hard to grasp or of crucial concern” 
(Abelove, 2003: xiii). Gossip has long been strategically employed by oppressed groups: 
gossip columns were used to draw attention to murders of black gay men in the 1980s 
(Holmes, 2015) or out closeted politicians who did not act on the AIDs epidemic (Potter, 
2006). This type of subversive gossip, at the time it is uttered, is often dismissed for its 
unsanctioned and unverifiable nature. In this vein, reflecting on the power inequality between 
creators and YouTube means paying attention to how YouTube occupies the role of the 
rational and objective actor in discourse. An example of how this boundary around rationality 
can be found in the official video on the algorithm, published within the YouTube Creators 
Academy, an online pedagogical resource (YouTube Creators [Creator Academy], 2017). 
Using twee stop motion animation, ‘the algorithm’ is represented by two twirling spools of 
tape inside a vintage CRT computer, implying folksy simplicity. A narrator states “how can I 
get the algorithm to like my videos? Pretty simple, get the audience to like your videos”. This 
video’s kooky branding acknowledges content creators’ interest in algorithmic processes, yet 
diverts any question about how content is promoted to audiences in the first place. The 
video obscures the political economic complexity of social media platforms, for example the 
complex role of YouTube as an advertiser-funded platform (Andrejevic, 2009) and the 
implication for preferred content genres, styles or formats (Bishop, 2018; Rieder & Sire, 
2014). In this vein, YouTube positions their platform as reasonable through a “meritocratic 
framework”, the idea that “talent will rise to the top” (Littler, 2013: 52). The video’s pair of 
twirling tape spools represent a simple analogue system: they serve good content to 
relevant audience. The subtext is not to worry about the technical requirements of 
algorithmic visibility: just simply make good content. YouTubers who articulate experiences 
of racism and inequality thus risk being positioned as irrational, calcifying the “boundary 
between those who are reasonable (read objective) and those who are unreasonable (overly 
agenda-driven)” (Adkins, 2002: 222). Those whose career on YouTube falls outside of this 
framework have gossip as one of the limited tools available to them. 
As gossip counters official narratives, algorithmic gossip often explicitly negotiates or 
diverges with information provided by YouTube. In interviews with vloggers, theories and 
experiences ranged from positive to negative. However, positive experiences skewed 
towards the vloggers that were often the most privileged in my sample, often those who 


===== PAGE 11 =====

 
10
were white and middle-class. Melanie, a high-profile full-time vlogger told me that she had 
also been regularly featured on the homepage ‘trending tab’ and that she is often promoted 
alongside two of her friends and collaborators. Similarly Amy, a part-time lifestyle vlogger, 
told me that an algorithmic update had been “favourable” to her content and caused one of 
her videos to skyrocket to half a million views. This favourability was precarious, and she 
mused that the algorithm “hasn’t been so kind since”. Ultimately, beauty vloggers were also 
burdened with determining why successful content had been successful, in an analytical 
processes that went beyond accepting that they had made ‘good content’. Such an 
approach can be seen as an informal take on the research technique of “reverse 
engineering”, which is defined as evaluating algorithmic input and output to determine how 
the “recipe of the algorithm is composed” (Kitchin, 2017: 24). The imagined reasons for 
algorithmic visibility often went beyond the data-driven, or beyond the level of video 
production. One full time beauty vlogger self-consciously told me she believed that she had 
been “white listed” by the trending tab, or consistently promoted on the homepage. She said 
“I have been told that the trending tab is completely algorithmic... it's like smart, smart 
intelligence. But I think that they can blacklist certain channels and whitelist...”. This vlogger 
believed her own success was in part due to the relationships that she had developed with 
YouTube, through participation within platform-based initiatives. All of those I interviewed 
monitored peaks and troughs in their algorithmic visibility, and questioned the sustainability 
of their life within the A List, wondering how long it would last.  
 
Locating algorithmic gossip as method   
I want to highlight the value of algorithmic gossip, even as it is (by definition) loose, 
interested talk. To make this point, I will demonstrate how algorithmic gossip can help 
researchers piece together understandings of how the cultural implications of YouTube’s 
algorithms. Herein, I draw from the work of Keith Negus, who studies the relationship 
between economics and culture in the music industry, or “the practices, interpretations and 
ways of life of musicians, fans and industry workers” (Negus, 1999: 3). Although Negus does 
not call out gossip explicitly, it is everywhere in his account of the relationship between 
genre and music industries. He observes culture is produced and reproduced through 
“boardroom anecdotes” (Negus, 1999: 34) ,“suggestions” from “consultants” (Negus, 1999: 
112) and “widely held beliefs” (Negus, 1999: 118) that take place in the “corridors, offices, 
desks, filing cabinets and boardrooms of the recording industry” (Negus, 1999: 178). 
Negus’s work details how complex processes of cultural production get streamlined and 
wrestled into saleable and commodified genres through social interaction. Looking for similar 
gossip (and accounts of gossip) can fruitfully reveal relationships between algorithms and 
production for genre on YouTube – particularly demonstrated by the belief that YouTube 
rewards the production of beauty content. This belief is widespread and productive. Indeed, 
high profile beauty vlogger Melanie told me in an interview that she had initially decided to 
make beauty video content on YouTube because she was told that it would become visible 
on the platform. She described starting her YouTube career by producing beauty content 
because she “wanted to do any videos that were performing easy” through the platforms’ 
algorithms. That creating beauty content would perform well was informed by talk – by 
conversations with friends, but also by the kinds of videos that became visible on YouTube 
that were produced by women. She said “it’s so weird, I’ve actually talked to so many girls 
who also agree with me... even the likes of Hazel [Heyes, a filmmaker], she did fashion 
videos and stuff back in the day, and that’s not her passion. Although Melanie argues she 
had many other ‘passions’, it became apparent through analytical talk that beauty production 
appeared a strategic and rational pathway to a sustainable career on the platform. Such an 
approach must be considered as a process of “rationalization”, defined as normalization in 
response to anticipation of risk in the success or visibility of cultural products (Negus, 1999).  
 
Even content creators who vlog within other genres theorized the lucrative nature of highly 
feminised content. Astrid, a lifestyle vlogger who predominately produces vlogs about books, 
told me that she occasionally makes beauty videos to amp up her popularity and visibility. 


===== PAGE 12 =====

 
11
Although her videos are mostly unrelated to beauty, even occasional inclusion in the beauty 
universe is beneficial to her channel and boosts her video engagement significantly. In the 
quote below, Astrid is careful to explain that she doesn’t dislike making this genre of content, 
but that she does employ it strategically, as beauty content often reaches an audience 5 
times the size of her book and lifestyle videos.  
 
A: So I make the stuff in general that I want to make, I do it however I want to do it, 
and from time to time I do videos that I know will do really well... that I will enjoy 
doing anyway... but it's like a what's in my bag video... a room tour video... it's the 
stuff that I know has 5 x more views than anything else I do... but it's sort of like 
seeing, like is there more content that I can do... like it's not like I wouldn't want to 
make it, but I know that I will give it a little boost hopefully. 
 
Me: And it's because people are searching for those? 
 
A: And it like blends into the beauty community. 
 
 
Astrid’s experience, which cannot be supported by concrete evidence, is that videos along 
beauty themes are more lucrative than those about books, prompting an adjustment in her 
content production to this end. Astrid believes making regular beauty content is important. 
This not confirmed by YouTube, but it is informed by community observations and reflections 
on the audience reach of videos she has produced. The point is not that Astrid is incorrect in 
her analysis. Rather, her subjective experiences and research practices, shared among 
friends and bolstered by ideas of a stable beauty community on the platform, work to shape 
her content production. Her theories, imaginaries and gossip inform ideas about visibility on 
the platform, and shape the content she produces. Her candid statements make visible an 
ambivalent process of sense-making that is informed by the content that young women 
make on YouTube, and how they talk about it. However, they also could serve as data about 
the genres YouTube values, which in turn shapes the content that is produced for the 
platform.  
 
Conclusion 
To study algorithmic gossip is to track and take seriously the snippets that become surfaced 
about how algorithms work as data. This paper has not argued for algorithmic gossip as a 
separate way of studying cultural production contingent to platforms, or as “good for some 
things (read the trivial and personal), but unimportant in the grand scheme of things” 
(Adkins, 2002: 219). Indeed, to take algorithmic gossip seriously as a method explicitly 
rejects Paul Dourish’s call to “be careful about the bounds and limits of algorithms and their 
functioning” when we study them. Dourish calls for researchers to respect algorithm as a 
“members term” for “computer scientist, software designers, and machine learning 
practitioners” (Dourish, 2016: 2). To be clear, Dourish is not dismissing the study of how 
algorithms work “within broader digital assemblages”, he wishes to isolate the term algorithm 
from its “others” such as data work and software engineering (Dourish, 2016: 2). However, 
women especially are not invited to the members club in which computer-science based 
definitions of algorithms are circulated (Marwick, 2013). A feminist perspective asks who has 
claim to expertise in such technology; who is an algorithmic professional? Algorithmic study 
through a feminist lens seeks to reframe the way that we think about algorithmic data and 
proof, and the widen the sources that we can practically draw from when researching 
algorithms. 
 
This paper has defined algorithmic gossip as, communally and socially informed, theories 
and strategies pertaining to recommender algorithms, shared and implemented to engender 
financial consistency and visibility on algorithmically structured social media platforms. In 
this vein, I have drawn from cultural industries research, which interrogates how the 
management of risk informs the rationalisation of cultural production (Havens, 2014; Saha, 


===== PAGE 13 =====

 
12
2018). Vloggers share theories to mitigate risk and produce content that is complicit with 
YouTube. Gossip is productive: talk informs and supports practices such as uploading 
frequently and producing feminised beauty content to perform more effectively on the 
platform.  
 
Algorithmic gossip is collaborative: creators who work on the same platforms impart their 
algorithmic experiences through formalised mailing lists (such as the Internet Creators Guild 
platform changelog), closed Facebook groups and through intimate requests for information 
from their fans. Gossip also can be considered as a tool for exposing platform discrimination 
and bias. This is particularly salient for beauty vloggers of colour, who publicly address 
personal experiences of racism. However, I have argued that the potential for social justice 
is limited, as gossip can risk being positioned as irrational (Adkins, 2002). Methodologically 
gossip is challenging – it is arguably not static or reproducible, due to the changeable nature 
of YouTube’s algorithm. However, this paper has argued for redrawing lines around viable 
methodologies to make room for gossip as proof of how algorithms work and have worked. 
Taking gossip seriously can present a valuable resource for revealing fragments of 
information about algorithms during particular algorithmic moments. It holds the opportunity 
to engage more meaningfully with talk at the boundaries of algorithmic systems, and to 
reflect on how these boundaries are constructed and reified.  
 
 
References  
Abelove, H. (2003). Deep gossip. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press. 
Abidin, C. (2016). Visibility labour: Engaging with Influencers’ fashion brands and# OOTD 
advertorial campaigns on Instagram. Media International Australia, 161(1), 86–100. 
Abidin, C. (2017). # familygoals: Family Influencers, Calibrated Amateurism, and Justifying 
Young Digital Labor. Social Media+ Society, 3(2), 2056305117707191. 
Adkins, K. C. (2002). The real dirt: Gossip and feminist epistemology. Social Epistemology, 
16(3), 215–232. https://doi.org/10.1080/0269172022000025598 
Andrejevic, M. (2009). Exploiting YouTube: contradictions of user-generated labor. In P. 
Snickars & P. Vonderau (Eds.), The YouTube Reader (Vol. 413). Retrieved from 
http://forskning.blogg.kb.se/files/2012/09/YouTube_Reader.pdf#page=204 
Bishop, S. (2018). Anxiety, panic and self-optimization: Inequalities and the YouTube 
algorithm. Convergence: The International Journal of Research into New Media 
Technologies, 24(1), 69–84. https://doi.org/10.1177/1354856517736978 
Bucher, T. (2016). Neither Black Nor Box: Ways of Knowing Algorithms. In S. Kubitschko & 
A. Kaun (Eds.), Innovative Methods in Media and Communication Research (pp. 81–
98). Cham, Switzerland: Palgrave Macmillan. 


===== PAGE 14 =====

 
13
Bucher, T. (2017). The algorithmic imaginary: exploring the ordinary affects of Facebook 
algorithms. Information, Communication & Society, 20(1), 30–44. 
https://doi.org/10.1080/1369118X.2016.1154086 
Bucher, T. (2018). Cleavage-Control: Stories of Algorithmic Culture and Power in the Case 
of the YouTube “Reply Girls.” In A Networked Self and Platforms, Stories, 
Connections (pp. 141–159). New York, NY: Routledge. 
Burgess, J., & Green, J. (2018). YouTube: Online video and participatory culture. John Wiley 
& Sons. 
Burr, T. (2016, November 23). [Tweet]. Retrieved February 19, 2019, from @TanyaBurr 
website: https://twitter.com/TanyaBurr/status/801695339854053377 
Cotter, K. (2018). Playing the visibility game: How digital influencers and algorithms 
negotiate influence on Instagram. New Media & Society, online first, 19. 
https://doi.org/10.1177/1461444818815684 
Crawford, K. (2016). Can an Algorithm be Agonistic? Ten Scenes from Life in Calculated 
Publics. Science, Technology, & Human Values, 41(1), 77–92. 
https://doi.org/10.1177/0162243915589635 
DeVito, M. A., Gergle, D., & Birnholtz, J. (2017). “Algorithms ruin everything”: #RIPTwitter, 
Folk Theories, and Resistance to Algorithmic Change in Social Media. Proceedings 
of the 2017 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems  - CHI ’17, 
3163–3174. https://doi.org/10.1145/3025453.3025659 
Dourish, P. (2016). Algorithms and their others: Algorithmic culture in context. Big Data & 
Society, 3(2), 205395171666512. https://doi.org/10.1177/2053951716665128 
Duffy, B. E. (2017). (Not) Getting Paid to Do What You Love: Gender, Social Media, and 
Aspirational work. New Haven, CT: Yale University Press. 
Eggleton, S. (2016, January 3) [Tweet]. Retrieved February 19, 2019, from 
@SophieEggleton website: 
https://twitter.com/SophieEggleton/status/683694248735182848 


===== PAGE 15 =====

 
14
Eslami, M., Karahalios, K., Sandvig, C., Vaccaro, K., Rickman, A., Hamilton, K., & Kirlik, A. 
(2016). First I “like” it, then I hide it: Folk Theories of Social Feeds. Proceedings of 
the 2016 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems - CHI ’16, 2371–
2382. https://doi.org/10.1145/2858036.2858494 
Eubanks, V. (2017). Automating inequality: how high-tech tools profile, police, and punish 
the poor (First Edition). New York, NY: St. Martin’s Press. 
García-Rapp, F. (2017). ‘Come join and let’s BOND’: authenticity and legitimacy building on 
YouTube’s beauty community. Journal of Media Practice, 18(2–3), 120–137. 
https://doi.org/10.1080/14682753.2017.1374693 
Gaunt, K. D. (2015). YouTube, Twerking & You: Context Collapse and the Handheld Co-
Presence of Black Girls and Miley Cyrus: YouTube, Twerking & You. Journal of 
Popular Music Studies, 27(3), 244–273. https://doi.org/10.1111/jpms.12130 
Gillespie, T. (2017). Algorithmically recognizable: Santorum’s Google problem, and Google’s 
Santorum problem. Information, Communication & Society, 20(1), 63–80. 
https://doi.org/10.1080/1369118X.2016.1199721 
Hallinan, B., & Striphas, T. (2016). Recommended for you: The Netflix Prize and the 
production of algorithmic culture. New Media & Society, 18(1), 117–137. 
Havens, T. (2014). Towards a Structuration Theory of Media Intermediaries. In D. Johnson, 
A. Santo, & D. Kompare (Eds.), Making Media Work: Cultures of Management in the 
Entertainment Industries (pp. 39–62). New York, NY: New York University Press. 
Holmes, K. (2015). What’s the TeaGossip and the Production of Black Gay Social History. 
Radical History Review, 2015(122), 55–69. https://doi.org/10.1215/01636545-
2849531 
ICG. (2019, February 19). Internet Creators Guild. Retrieved February 19, 2019, from 
https://internetcreatorsguild.com/ 
Kitchin, R. (2017). Thinking critically about and researching algorithms. Information, 
Communication & Society, 20(1), 14–29. 
https://doi.org/10.1080/1369118X.2016.1154087 


===== PAGE 16 =====

 
15
Levin, R. (2017, November 11) [Tweet]. Retrieved September 5, 2018, from @rclbeauty101 
website: https://twitter.com/rclbeauty101/status/929476526785089536 
Littler, J. (2013). Meritocracy as Plutocracy: The Marketising of “Equality” Under 
Neoliberalism. New Formations, 80(80), 52–72. 
https://doi.org/10.3898/NewF.80/81.03.2013 
London, Z. (2016, January 3) [Tweet]. Retrieved February 19, 2019, from @zoelondondj 
website: https://twitter.com/zoelondondj/status/683694426267488256 
Marwick, A. (2013). Status Update: Celebrity, Publicity, and Branding in the Social Media 
Age. New Haven, CT: Yale University Press. 
McRobbie, A. (1982). The Politics of Feminist Research: Between Talk, Text and Action. 
Feminist Review, 12, 46–57. 
Meehan, E. R. (1986). Meehan, Conceptualizing Culture as Commodity. Critical Studies in 
Mass Communication, 3(4), 448–457. https://doi.org/15295038609366675 
Myers West, S. (2018). Censored, suspended, shadowbanned: User interpretations of 
content moderation on social media platforms. New Media & Society, 1–18. 
https://doi.org/10.1177/1461444818773059 
Negus, K. (1999). Music Genres and Corporate Cultures. New York, NY: Routledge. 
Nieborg, D. B., & Poell, T. (2018). The platformization of cultural production: Theorizing the 
contingent cultural commodity. New Media & Society, 18. 
https://doi.org/10.1177/1461444818769694 
Noble, S. U. (2018). Algorithms of Oppression: How Search Engines Reinforce Racism. New 
York, NY: New York University Press. 
Oh, D. C., & Oh, C. (2017). Vlogging White Privilege Abroad: Eat Your Kimchi ’s Eating and 
Spitting Out of the Korean Other on YouTube: Vlogging White Privilege Abroad. 
Communication, Culture & Critique, 10(4), 696–711. 
https://doi.org/10.1111/cccr.12180 
Postigo, H. (2014). The socio-technical architecture of digital labor: Converting play into 
YouTube money. New Media & Society, 1461444814541527. 


===== PAGE 17 =====

 
16
Postill, J., & Pink, S. (2012). Social Media Ethnography: The Digital Researcher in a Messy 
Web. Media International Australia, 145(1), 123–134. 
https://doi.org/10.1177/1329878X1214500114 
Potter, C. B. (2006). Queer Hoover: Sex, Lies, and Political History. Journal of the History of 
Sexuality, 15(3), 355–381. Retrieved from JSTOR. 
Rieder, B., Matamoros-Fernández, A., & Coromina, Ò. (2018). From ranking algorithms to 
‘ranking cultures’: Investigating the modulation of visibility in YouTube search results. 
Convergence: The International Journal of Research into New Media Technologies, 
24(1), 50–68. https://doi.org/10.1177/1354856517736982 
Rieder, B., & Sire, G. (2014). Conflicts of interest and incentives to bias: A microeconomic 
critique of Google’s tangled position on the Web. New Media & Society, 16(2), 195–
211. https://doi.org/10.1177/1461444813481195 
Ryan, B. (1992). Making Capital from Culture: the Corporate Form of Capitalist Cultural 
Production. Berlin: Walter de Gruyter. 
Saha, A. (2018). Race and the Cultural Industries. Malden, MA: Polity. 
Sandvig, C., Hamilton, K., Karahalios, K., & Langbort, C. (2014). Auditing Algorithms: 
Research Methods for Detecting Discrimination on Internet Platforms. Paper 
Presented to “Data and Discrimination: Converting Critical Concerns into Productive 
Inquiry,” a Preconference at the 64th Annual Meeting of the International 
Communication Association. May 22, 2014; Seattle, WA, USA., 23. Retrieved from 
https://pdfs.semanticscholar.org/b722/7cbd34766655dea10d0437ab10df3a127396.p
df 
Scola Dondo. (2017). Race on YouTube: Being the Token Black Girl | Scola Dondo. 
Retrieved from https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=EEhVbDnqqpM&t=424s 
Seaver, N. (2017). Algorithms as culture: Some tactics for the ethnography of algorithmic 
systems. Big Data & Society, 4(2), 205395171773810. 
https://doi.org/10.1177/2053951717738104 


===== PAGE 18 =====

 
17
Senft, T. M. (2008). Camgirls: celebrity and community in the age of social networks. New 
York, NY: Lang. 
Striphas, T. (2015). Algorithmic culture. European Journal of Cultural Studies, 18(4–5), 395–
412. https://doi.org/10.1177/1367549415577392 
Victory, G. (2018). DOES YOUTUBE DISCRIMINATE? | GRACE. Retrieved from 
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Vk7smRxJr94&t=578s 
Vonderau, P. (2019). The Spotify Effect: Digital Distribution and Financial Growth. Television 
& New Media, 20(1), 3–19. https://doi.org/10.1177/1527476417741200 
Waddington, K. (2012). Gossip and organizations. New York: Routledge. 
Willson, M. (2017). Algorithms (and the) everyday. Information, Communication & Society, 
20(1), 137–150. https://doi.org/10.1080/1369118X.2016.1200645 
YouTube. (2019). YouTube Space. Retrieved December 31, 2018, from 
https://www.youtube.com/intl/en-GB/yt/space/london/unlock/ 
YouTube Creators [Creator Academy]. (2017). “The Algorithm” - How YouTube Search & 
Discovery Works. Retrieved from https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=hPxnIix5ExI 
Ziewitz, M. (2016). Governing Algorithms: Myth, Mess, and Methods. Science, Technology, 
& Human Values, 41(1), 3–16. https://doi.org/10.1177/0162243915608948 
 
