ID: B14
DOI: 10.1609/icwsm.v18i1.31376
中文译名: 审计社交媒体信息流的算法解释：TikTok视频解释案例研究
英文原题: Auditing Algorithmic Explanations of Social Media Feeds: A Case Study of TikTok Video Explanations
原文件: 文献全文/正文/B14_2024_审计社交媒体信息流的算法解释：TikTok视频解释案例研究__Auditing Algorithmic Explanations of Social Media Feeds A Case Study of TikTok Video Explanations.pdf
源URL: https://ojs.aaai.org/index.php/ICWSM/article/download/31376/33536
提取说明: 仅为机械文本提取，页码标记依原PDF；不代表已完成论证核验。


===== PAGE 1 =====

Auditing Algorithmic Explanations of Social Media Feeds: A Case Study of
TikTok Video Explanations
Sepehr Mousavi1, Krishna P. Gummadi1, Savvas Zannettou2
1Max Planck Institute for Software Systems, Saarbr¨ucken, Germany
2TU Delft, Delft, The Netherlands
smousavi@mpi-sws.org, gummadi@mpi-sws.org, s.zannettou@tudelft.nl
Abstract
In recent years, user feeds on social media platforms have
shifted from simple, chronologically ordered content posted
by their network connections (i.e., friends) to opaque, al-
gorithmically ordered and curated content. This shift has
led to regulations that require platforms to offer end users
greater transparency and control over their algorithmic
recommendation-based feeds. In response, social media plat-
forms such as TikTok have recently started explaining why
speciﬁc videos are recommended to end users. However, we
still lack a good understanding of how these explanations are
generated and whether they offer the desired transparency to
end users. In this work, we audit explanations provided on
short-format videos on TikTok. We collect a large dataset
of short-format videos and explanations provided by Tik-
Tok (when available) using automated sockpuppet accounts.
Then, we systematically characterize the explanations, focus-
ing on their accuracy and comprehensiveness. For our as-
sessments, we compare the provided explanations with video
metadata and the behavior of our sockpuppet accounts. Our
analysis shows that some generic (non-personalized) reasons
are always included in explanations (e.g., “This video is pop-
ular in your country”), while at the same time, we ﬁnd that a
large number of provided explanations are incompatible with
the behavior of our sockpuppet accounts; e.g., an account
that made zero comments on the platform, was presented
with the explanation “You commented on similar videos” in
34% of all recommended videos. Overall, our audit of Tik-
Tok video explanations highlights the need for more accu-
rate, ﬁne-grained, and useful explanations for the end users.
We will make our code and dataset available to assist the re-
search community.
1
Introduction
As you browse through your social media feeds, be it TikTok
videos, Instagram Reels, YouTube Shorts, Facebook news-
feed, or Twitter timeline, have you ever wondered how or
why the next content instance is being chosen for you by
social media platforms? This question is becoming increas-
ingly relevant as our default social media feeds shift from
chronologically ordered content from sources (i.e., friends
and followings) explicitly selected by us to algorithmically
ordered content from any source implicitly inferred to match
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
Figure 1: Example of video explanations on TikTok. Typ-
ically, a TikTok video has multiple potential explanations.
In this example, the video has two potential explanations, as
denoted by the bullet points.
our interests by recommender systems. These systems aim to
curate, i.e., select and order, personalized social media feeds
based on users’ data (either explicitly provided or implicitly
inferred), such as their demographic, behavioral, and interest
information. Algorithmically curated feeds are credited with
increasing users’ engagement with content and time spent
on social media platforms, resulting in greater revenues for
the platforms. However, concerns have been raised that al-
gorithmic content curation is opaque and non-transparent to
end users, takes choice and control over what content they
see away from end users, and leads to undesirable phenom-
ena, such as recommending content with extreme and po-
larizing viewpoints (TikTok 2020; Ribeiro et al. 2020; Led-
wich and Zaitsev 2019; Tufekci 2018). As a result, there is
a growing demand and need for greater transparency in so-
cial media feeds, particularly in how these recommendation
systems operate, what user data they take into account, and
how they impact users.
Recently, regulatory bodies like the European Com-
mission started working towards providing guidelines and
regulations to assist algorithmic transparency efforts. No-
tably, the EU passed the Digital Services Act (European
Commission 2023), which highlights the importance of
algorithmic transparency and calls for systematic audits
Proceedings of the Eighteenth International AAAI Conference on Web and Social Media (ICWSM 2024)
1110


===== PAGE 2 =====

of algorithmically-powered recommendation systems. The
DSA attempts to hold very large social media platforms to
account for systemic risks that may arise from the increasing
use of algorithmically-powered recommendation systems.
For instance, algorithmically-powered recommendation sys-
tems can trap end-users in ﬁlter bubbles (WSJ Staff 2021),
suggest extreme content (Ribeiro et al. 2020), or amplify bi-
ases (Baeza-Yates 2020).
Against this background, social media platforms like Tik-
Tok started providing algorithmic explanations on why spe-
ciﬁc short-format videos are recommended to end-users in
their feeds (TikTok 2022). Figure 1 shows an example of
video explanations provided by TikTok for a recommended
video in TikTok’s “For You” feed. In this particular video,
TikTok provided two explanations, each described by a bul-
let point. These efforts are a signiﬁcant step towards greater
algorithmic transparency. Particularly, accurate explanations
can help end-users better understand why they view certain
content on their personalized feeds and, if necessary, change
or control the provision of such content. For example, rec-
ommendation systems can potentially push a user’s feed to-
wards a rabbit hole of sad content (WSJ Staff 2021). In this
case, accurate explanations can help the end user to notice
such a circumstance and take the appropriate action. Despite
the importance of video explanations, as a research commu-
nity, we lack 1) empirical insights and a deeper understand-
ing of how these algorithmic explanations are applied; and
2) systematic audits to assess explanations’ accuracy and
comprehensiveness.
Research Focus. Motivated by this research gap, we focus
on understanding video explanations on TikTok, mainly be-
cause of the increasing popularity of the platform and the
fact that TikTok is among the few platforms that provide
explanations for algorithmic recommendations. We aim to
answer:
• RQ1 - Characterization: What are TikTok’s various
types of video explanations, and how does TikTok apply
these explanations to videos?
• RQ2 - Audit: How accurate and comprehensive is the
provision of video explanations on TikTok?
To answer these research questions, we designed and im-
plemented a sockpuppet-based audit to collect a large-scale
dataset of videos and explanations provided by the TikTok
platform. We implemented sockpuppet accounts that do not
engage with videos, as well as sockpuppet accounts that
have engagement by either liking/sharing videos or follow-
ing TikTok creators. We collected a dataset of 69K video
views, including 32K unique videos, presented to 45 dif-
ferent sockpuppet accounts. Our sockpuppet accounts were
presented with 128K explanations, comprising eight differ-
ent explanations. Note that as shown in Figure 1, videos may
contain multiple explanations. Next, we analyzed the col-
lected dataset to understand how these TikTok explanations
are applied. Finally, we operationalized multiple aspects of
these explanations, such as their accuracy and comprehen-
siveness, and assessed their degree on TikTok.
Main ﬁndings. Our analysis makes the following ﬁndings:
• We ﬁnd eight different explanations provided on TikTok
videos and we broadly categorize them into engagement-
based explanations (ﬁve explanations) and content-based
explanations (three explanations) (RQ1).
• We ﬁnd some explanations in almost all the videos; E.g.,
the explanation “This video is popular in your country”
appears in over 98% of the videos in our dataset (RQ1).
• We ﬁnd that explanations are written in a personalized
manner but applied in a non-personalized way. For in-
stance, we ﬁnd the explanation “You commented on sim-
ilar videos” to 34% of the videos that our sockpuppet ac-
counts encountered when they made zero comments on
the platform (RQ1).
• We ﬁnd varying degrees of accuracy across the expla-
nations. Overall, we ﬁnd that content-based explanations
are applied accurately on TikTok, however, when consid-
ering engagement-based explanations, we ﬁnd a substan-
tial number of false positives (i.e., there is an explanation,
but we do not ﬁnd any link with the account’s behavior)
or false negatives (i.e., there is no explanation but we do
ﬁnd a link with the account’s behavior) (RQ2).
• We ﬁnd that TikTok does not provide all possible expla-
nations; for only 9% of the videos, TikTok provided all
possible explanations (RQ2).
Implications. Our analysis and ﬁndings have important im-
plications for various interested stakeholders, including so-
cial media operators, policymakers, and the research com-
munity. First, our analysis shows that the explanations are in-
accurate and incomprehensive. All these aspects affect their
utility to end-users, which highlights the need for social me-
dia platforms to develop better explainable algorithmically-
based recommendation systems. For instance, when an ex-
planation is presented in almost all the videos, it likely
provides little helpful information to end-users, who will
likely ignore these explanations. Our study is also of interest
to policymakers who aim to assess the compliance of so-
cial media platforms with current regulations like the DSA.
Our analysis shows that the provided explanations are likely
not capturing user behavior effectively, indicating that these
transparency efforts might not fully comply with the exist-
ing regulations. Finally, our study prompts further studies to
assess the compliance of social media platforms with trans-
parency regulations. The research community can build on
top of our work to make longitudinal and multi-platform au-
dits of algorithmic recommendations. To assist the research
community in future research endeavors, we have made our
code and dataset available, which can be used to perform
longitudinal audits and further analysis of video explana-
tions.1
2
Data Collection
This section describes our methodology for collecting our
dataset. In a nutshell, we develop sockpuppet accounts that
scroll through TikTok’s “For You” page and capture the ex-
planations provided to each video.
1https://github.com/sepehrmousavi/TikTok-Explanations
1111


===== PAGE 3 =====

2.1
Sockpuppet Accounts
A substantial challenge when studying video explanations
on TikTok is that the explanations are only available via
TikTok’s mobile applications, and there is no API that pro-
vides data about the explanations provided to users. To over-
come this challenge, we develop a sockpuppet data col-
lection methodology that uses the Android Debug Bridge
(ADB) (Developers 2023) to control and simulate a user’s
behavior on an Android phone. Particularly, we created mul-
tiple TikTok accounts for our data collection. We registered
all the sockpuppet accounts with the same date of birth and
did not specify any gender for the accounts upon registra-
tion. For our data collection, a sockpuppet account ﬁrst lo-
gins to the TikTok platform using one of the accounts we
created. Then, the sockpuppet account visits TikTok’s “For
You” feed, and for each video, it: 1) identiﬁes the type
of video; 2) collects the explanations provided by TikTok;
3) engages with the video according to the sockpuppet’s con-
ﬁguration; and 4) swipes up to the next video.
Identifying the type of videos. TikTok’s “For You” feed in-
cludes different types of videos; apart from regular videos,
it includes videos that are advertisements or live streams.
Therefore, we must ﬁrst identify the regular videos and skip
videos that are advertisements or live streams, mainly be-
cause live streams do not have explanations, while adver-
tisements have different explanations that require different
steps to capture. To identify the type of a video, the sock-
puppet account takes a screenshot and processes it using the
OpenCV library (OpenCV 2023) to detect patterns pertain-
ing to regular videos, advertisements, or live streams. Partic-
ularly, for live streams, we search for patterns in the screen-
shot that include the label “LIVE video,” and do not include
any buttons for engaging with the videos (the engagement
buttons only appear after a user clicks on the video to go to
the live stream). If the video is not a live stream, the sock-
puppet account then presses the “Share” button, which opens
the menu for the video; this allows us to identify if a video is
an advertisement or not. This is because all advertisements
should provide explanations, hence we search in the menu
items for the button called “About this ad.” If we ﬁnd such
a button, we mark the video as an advertisement, otherwise,
we treat the video as a regular video.
Collecting video explanations. For all videos that we iden-
tiﬁed as regular videos, the sockpuppet account presses the
“Share” button, takes a screenshot, and processes it to iden-
tify if there exists a “Why this video” button and locates it.
If there is no such button, TikTok did not provide any expla-
nation. If the button exists, the sockpuppet account presses
the “Why this video” button, takes a screenshot and per-
forms Optical Character Recognition (OCR) using Python-
tesseract (Google 2023b) to extract the provided explana-
tions in text format.
Engaging with videos based on conﬁguration. After cap-
turing the explanations, the sockpuppet account engages
with the video based on the account’s conﬁguration. In this
work, we consider three engagement activities: liking, shar-
ing, and following. To like a video, the sockpuppet account
taps on the heart icon. To share a video, the sockpuppet ac-
count taps on the “Share” panel and then taps on the “Copy
link” button once the sharing panel pops up. 2 Lastly, to fol-
low a content creator, the sockpuppet account ﬁrst checks if
the user is already followed or not by inspecting the screen-
shots of the video and ﬁnding the red plus icon located below
the user’s proﬁle picture. If this icon is found, the sockpup-
pet account taps on it to follow the content creator.
Swiping up to the next video. Once the sockpuppet account
engages with the current video, it swipes to view the next
recommended content on its personalized “For You” feed.
As shown by previous work, the view duration of a TikTok
video inﬂuences the personalization of content for the end-
users (Boeker and Urman 2022). To minimize this effect, the
sockpuppet account swipes the screen up as soon as it iden-
tiﬁes the type of video, collects the video explanations, and
engages with the video. Our sockpuppet accounts typically
swipe to the next video within 15 seconds (see Fig. 4(b)).
2.2
Experimental Setup
We designed and ran nine account conﬁgurations, each con-
sisting of ﬁve sockpuppet accounts with identical behavior.
Each sockpuppet account is controlled by a bot running on
an Android mobile device and watches 1.8K videos divided
into six sessions (300 videos in each session). Random de-
lays separate each session to avoid overloading the TikTok
platform. We ran ﬁve identical sockpuppet accounts for each
conﬁguration. Table 1 provides an overview of the conﬁgu-
ration of our sockpuppet accounts.
No Engagement (NE) Conﬁguration. The sockpuppet ac-
counts with the NE conﬁguration visit the “For You” feed,
capture the explanations from all regular videos, and do not
perform any engagement actions (no shares, no likes, etc.).
Liking (L1-L3) Conﬁguration. These sockpuppet accounts
visit the “For You” feed, and after capturing the explana-
tions, they like videos with a probability of 0.05, 0.1, and
0.2 for L1, L2, and L3, respectively.
Sharing (S1-S3) Conﬁguration. The sockpuppet accounts
with the S1-S3 conﬁgurations are similar to the L1-L3 con-
ﬁgurations, with the difference that instead of liking videos,
they share a video with the same probabilities.
Following (F1-F2) Conﬁguration. The sockpuppet ac-
counts for the F1 and F2 conﬁgurations visit the “For You”
feed, capture the video explanations, and follow the creator
with a probability of 0.05 and 0.1 for F1 and F2, respectively.
During our data collection, we observed that TikTok drops
many of the Like and Follow actions (see two last columns
in Table 1); these drops are likely due to TikTok’s anti-spam
or anti-engagement-fraud mechanisms. These drops can po-
tentially affect the recommended videos, however, since our
work aims to study the video explanations, we believe these
drops would not affect our main ﬁndings. Also, when per-
forming our analysis, we consider only the actions recorded
2TikTok considers copying the video link as a share action as
conﬁrmed by obtaining data using GDPR access requests. More-
over, according to our investigation and empirical ﬁndings pre-
sented in Table 4, simply tapping on the “Share” panel is not con-
sidered as an engagement signal by TikTok.
1112


===== PAGE 4 =====

Conﬁg
P (Like)
P (Share)
P (F ollow)
#Bot
Actions
#TikTok
Actions
NE
0
0
0
0
0
L1
0.05
0
0
385
263
L2
0.10
0
0
776
418
L3
0.20
0
0
1,485
776
S1
0
0.05
0
367
366
S2
0
0.10
0
820
818
S3
0
0.20
0
1,465
1,464
F1
0
0
0.05
388
159
F2
0
0
0.10
741
252
Table 1: Conﬁguration of our automated accounts. We report the probabilities that an account will like, share, and follow a video
appearing on the “For You” feed. We also report the number of attempted actions performed by the account and the number of
actions that TikTok recorded.
by TikTok and disregard not-recorded actions made by our
sockpuppet accounts.
2.3
Data Collection
We ran our data collection between March 28, 2023, and
May 5, 2023. For each sockpuppet account, we requested
the account’s activity using the right of access to data sub-
jects described by the EU General Data Protection Regula-
tion (Commision 2016), similarly to (Zannettou et al. 2023).
This allows us to obtain the account’s entire activity, includ-
ing all the video identiﬁers that the user watched and all
the actions recorded by the TikTok platform. This is a cru-
cial and necessary step, as there is no easy way to obtain
the video identiﬁer from the TikTok mobile application.3
Then, we match the explanations extracted from the screen-
shots and the videos based on the timestamps. Also, after
obtaining the datasets from TikTok, following our GDPR re-
quest, we perform a metadata collection for each video using
an unofﬁcial Python wrapper for the TikTok API (Teather
2022). For each video, we obtain the video’s title, descrip-
tion, and associated metrics, such as the number of views,
likes, shares, and comments that the video received on Tik-
Tok. We perform this additional metadata collection, as the
data provided by TikTok includes only the video identi-
ﬁers without any metadata about each video. Overall, our
sockpuppet accounts viewed 81,000 videos; 70,065 regular
videos, 10,132 advertisement videos, and 803 live streams.
In this work, we focus on regular videos, and after excluding
the videos with no metadata (less than 1%), our dataset con-
sists of 69,430 video views, including 32,553 unique videos.
Our sockpuppet accounts identiﬁed explanations in 63,394
video views, and TikTok provided a total of 128,324 video
explanations (eight unique explanations, see Table 2).
3
RQ1: Characterizing Video Explanations
Here we present our characterization of video explanations.
We discuss the various types of explanations in Section 3.1,
3The only way is to press the “Share” button and copy the video
link. However, this is considered a share action, and we want to
avoid doing this as this will mean that our accounts share all videos.
Category
Explanation
Engagement-
based
You shared similar videos
You commented on similar videos
You liked similar videos
You are following <username>
You watched similar videos
Content-
based
This video is longer, and you seem to like longer
videos
This video is popular in your country
This video was posted recently
Table 2: List of video explanations. The bold text refers to
the name of each explanation (used throughout the paper).
while Section 3.2 presents our analysis for characterizing
how TikTok applies the explanations, how prevalent each
type of explanation is, and how the explanations are corre-
lated with user engagement and video characteristics.
3.1
Types of Video Explanations
We start by looking at the explanations that we discov-
ered (see Table 2). Our sockpuppet accounts encountered
eight explanations, and we broadly categorize them into
Engagement-based Explanations and Content-based Expla-
nations.
Engagement-based explanations consider user engage-
ment when generating the explanations. Our sockpuppet ac-
counts encountered ﬁve Engagement-based explanations:
• Shared: “You shared similar videos.” Refers to videos
similar to the videos a user has previously shared on Tik-
Tok or other platforms (e.g., WhatsApp, Facebook, etc.).
• Commented: “You commented on similar videos.”
Refers to videos that are similar to the videos that a user
commented on.
• Liked: “You liked similar videos.” Refers to videos that
are similar to the videos a user previously liked.
• Following: “You are following < username >.” Refers
to videos uploaded by a creator that a user has already
followed. This is a parameterized explanation, as it pro-
1113


===== PAGE 5 =====

Conﬁg.
#Videos
%Ad
Videos
#Reg.
Videos
%Reg. Videos
w. Explanations
NE
8,943
13.98 %
7,645
92.35 %
L1
8,912
11.74 %
7,804
87.03 %
L2
8,959
10.36 %
7,952
89.96 %
L3
8,927
12.98 %
7,684
94.47 %
S1
8,893
11.02 %
7,818
97.93 %
S2
8,917
12.37 %
7,728
96.27 %
S3
8,958
15.73 %
7,444
98.27 %
F1
8,917
11.73 %
7,731
88.42 %
F2
8,939
13.55 %
7,624
77.15 %
Table 3: Video statistics for each conﬁguration.
vides a creator’s username at the end.
• Watched: “You watched similar videos.” Refers to
videos that are similar to the previously viewed videos
that a user watched until the end.
Content-based explanations are provided because of con-
tent characteristics, such as the content length, the popular-
ity of the content, and when it was posted. Our sockpuppet
accounts encountered three Content-based explanations;
• Longer: “The video is longer, and you seem to like
longer videos.” Refers to videos that have a long dura-
tion. Note that the phrasing of this explanation hints to-
ward both Engagement and Content signals. However,
based on our analysis in Section 3.2, we argue that it is a
primarily Content-based explanation.
• Popular: “This video is popular in your country.” Refers
to videos that are popular in the user’s country.
• Recently: “The video was posted recently.” Refers to
videos recommended to a user shortly after their creation.
Overall, by reading these explanations, it becomes ap-
parent that several aspects of these explanations are vague,
which can potentially limit their utility to end-users. For in-
stance, many explanations include “similar videos,” without
providing context on assessing the content similarity. Also,
there are no clear guidelines on what constitutes a long, pop-
ular, or recent video when providing these explanations.
3.2
Prevalence and Characterization of
Explanations
Here, we characterize and measure the prevalence of video
explanations. Table 3 reports the number of videos watched
by our sockpuppet accounts for each account conﬁguration
and the percentage of videos with video explanations. We
observe that most videos have explanations, on average,
91.31% of all videos. Also, by examining the number of ex-
planations per video, we ﬁnd that 8.69% of the videos have
no explanations, 89.10% of the videos have two explana-
tions, 2.18% of the videos have three explanations, while
0.02% of the videos have four explanations. Our sockpuppet
accounts encountered 10%-15% of videos that were adver-
tisements; all the advertisements had explanations that were
completely different from those provided in regular videos.
Given that ad explanations are extensively studied by previ-
ous work (Andreou et al. 2018; Lee et al. 2022; Wei et al.
2020; Wilkinson et al. 2021; Gkiouzepi et al. 2023), in our
analysis, we focus on explanations provided to content that
is recommended by the TikTok algorithm and is not adver-
tisements, namely regular videos.
Prevalence of video explanations. Next, we aim to mea-
sure and analyze the prevalence of each explanation. We do
this analysis to potentially understand how TikTok applies
these explanations and explore the factuality of video ex-
planations. Table 4 reports, for each conﬁguration, the per-
centage of videos that had each video explanation (each row
reports the mean and standard deviation of ﬁve sockpup-
pet accounts). We make several observations. For the NE
conﬁguration, where the sockpuppet accounts scroll through
the “For You” feed without engaging with the videos (other
than watching the videos for a few seconds), we observe a
surprisingly large percentage of Engagement-based expla-
nations. Speciﬁcally, 34% of the videos received the Com-
mented explanation, 8% the Liked explanation, and 0.67%
the Shared explanation. These results are surprising, given
that the sockpuppet accounts did not comment, like, or share
any video in this account conﬁguration. Second, we ob-
serve that the Popular explanation is provided to almost all
videos across all conﬁgurations (more than 98%). Third, for
the conﬁgurations involving user engagement (i.e., liking,
sharing, and following accounts), we observe that the preva-
lence of the explanations changes based on the sockpuppet
behavior. For instance, when the sockpuppet accounts like
videos (see conﬁgurations L1-L3), the Liked explanation is
provided to 89%-97% of all videos; however, we still ob-
serve videos receiving explanations for other engagements
that the account did not perform (e.g., 2%-6% for Com-
mented explanation). The same ﬁnding applies when sock-
puppet accounts share videos (see conﬁgurations S1 to S3)
or followed accounts (conﬁgurations F1 and F2). For the
Following explanation, we observe that it is only provided to
the sockpuppet accounts that followed some accounts with
only a small percentage of videos (3%-6%). Finally, we ob-
serve that the Recently explanation is not frequent; we only
encountered it in 0.03% of all videos in the S1 conﬁguration.
Videos with explanations vs. without explanations. Here,
we aim to uncover potential underlying reasons why a con-
siderable percentage of videos (8.69%) do not have explana-
tions. Given that almost all videos have the Popular expla-
nation, a potential reason for not including explanations for
some videos is that those videos are not popular on TikTok.
To assess if this is a valid reason, we compare the distribu-
tions of various popularity metrics (number of views, likes,
shares, and comments) for videos that received explanations
and videos without explanations. We use these metrics as
a proxy for content popularity on TikTok, which is in line
with previous work (Klug et al. 2021; Boeker and Urman
2022). Figure 2 shows the Cumulative Distribution Func-
tion (CDF) of the number of views, likes, shares, and com-
ments for videos with explanations and videos without ex-
planations for all the videos in our dataset. We observe that
videos with explanations generally have more views, likes,
shares, and comments than videos without explanations. No-
1114


===== PAGE 6 =====

Conﬁg
%Shared
%Commented
%Liked
%Following
%Watched
%Longer
%Popular
%Recently
NE
0.67 ± 0.5
34.09 ± 5.5
8.01 ± 0.7
0.00 ± 0.0
56.00 ± 3.7
1.93 ± 2.2
100.00 ± 0.0
0.00 ± 0.0
L1
0.03 ± 0.0
6.78 ± 2.8
89.62 ± 3.9
0.00 ± 0.0
3.51 ± 3.3
5.52 ± 6.7
99.97 ± 0.0
0.00 ± 0.0
L2
0.00 ± 0.0
2.71 ± 1.8
97.24 ± 1.8
0.00 ± 0.0
0.01 ± 0.0
1.28 ± 1.5
99.99 ± 0.0
0.00 ± 0.0
L3
0.00 ± 0.0
4.22 ± 1.1
95.78 ± 1.1
0.00 ± 0.0
0.00 ± 0.0
2.04 ± 2.7
99.97 ± 0.1
0.00 ± 0.0
S1
94.95 ± 1.5
3.70 ± 0.9
0.83 ± 0.5
0.00 ± 0.0
0.48 ± 0.9
1.90 ± 2.0
99.95 ± 0.0
0.03 ± 0.1
S2
97.84 ± 0.9
1.68 ± 0.7
0.48 ± 0.3
0.00 ± 0.0
0.00 ± 0.0
0.55 ± 0.4
99.99 ± 0.0
0.00 ± 0.0
S3
98.46 ± 0.4
1.27 ± 0.3
0.26 ± 0.2
0.00 ± 0.0
0.00 ± 0.0
0.82 ± 0.5
99.99 ± 0.0
0.00 ± 0.0
F1
0.07 ± 0.1
31.63 ± 15.9
14.06 ± 13.2
2.99 ± 1.3
51.98 ± 12.7
3.66 ± 3.1
99.66 ± 0.3
0.00 ± 0.0
F2
0.07 ± 0.1
59.65 ± 13.1
20.52 ± 10.3
5.86 ± 3.2
19.40 ± 22.7
2.31 ± 2.2
98.54 ± 1.2
0.00 ± 0.0
Table 4: Percentage of videos that have each explanation. We focus on the set of videos that had at least one explanation.Each
row contains, for each conﬁguration, the mean and standard deviation of the percentage of videos that had the corresponding
explanation across the ﬁve sockpuppet accounts.
101
103
105
107
109
#Views
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
CDF
with
explanations
without
explanations
(a) Views
100 101 102 103 104 105 106 107
#Likes
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
CDF
(b) Likes
100 101 102 103 104 105 106
#Shares
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
CDF
(c) Shares
100
101
102
103
104
105
106
#Comments
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
CDF
(d) Comments
Figure 2: CDF of the number of views, likes, shares, and comments on TikTok for videos with and without explanations.
tably, for views (see Figure 2(a)), we observe that almost all
the videos with explanations have more than 100K views,
whereas, for videos without explanations, we observe a con-
siderable percentage of videos that are below 100K views
(25%). The same applies to the likes (see Figure 2(b)); most
of the videos with explanations have more than one thousand
likes, while 14% of the videos without explanations have
less than one thousand likes. For shares and comments, we
cannot ﬁnd a clear cut-off lower-bound threshold for videos
with explanations; still, the videos with explanations tend to
have more shares and comments than videos without expla-
nations.
Video Explanations and Video Engagement. Here, we in-
vestigate if there is any correlation between the video meta-
data and the provided explanations. Our results, thus far,
show that accounts that do not engage with videos on Tik-
Tok are provided with a substantial number of engagement-
based explanations (i.e., liking, sharing, and commenting).
One question that arises is whether TikTok provides such
explanations to videos that generally have very high engage-
ment on the entire platform, irrespective of the user’s ac-
tions. In other words, we aim to investigate, for instance, if
TikTok is more likely to provide the Liked explanation to
videos that have already accumulated a lot of likes on Tik-
Tok. Figure 3 shows the CDF of the number of likes, shares,
and comments for videos that had the Liked, Shared, and
Commented explanation and videos without those explana-
tions, respectively, for the NE conﬁguration. We observe that
videos that receive the Liked explanation have substantially
more likes on TikTok compared to the videos without the
Liked explanation. The same applies to the videos that re-
ceive the Shared and Commented explanations. The differ-
ences in these distributions are signiﬁcant, as conﬁrmed by
a two-sample Kolmogorov-Smirnov test (p < 0.01). We re-
peated the same analysis for the rest of the conﬁgurations,
ﬁnding similar statistically signiﬁcant results. Overall, these
results imply that the engagement received by a video on
the entire TikTok platform will likely affect the provided ex-
planations, as we observed that even for accounts with no
engagement, we have videos that receive these explanations,
likely because they already have a lot of engagement.
Video Explanations and Video Characteristics. We also
compare the video explanations with video-based character-
istics like the video duration. Particularly, we compare the
distributions of the video duration for videos that received
the Longer explanation and videos without the Longer ex-
planation (see Figure 4(a)). We observe that all videos that
receive the Longer explanation have a duration of 45 sec-
onds or more, whereas the overwhelming majority of videos
without the Longer explanation have a duration of less than
45 seconds. Recall, however, that the explanation is phrased
as “This video is longer, and you seem to like longer videos,”
which indicates that TikTok also considers the user behav-
ior when providing this explanation. To investigate whether
TikTok actually considers user engagement (in the form of
watching the videos till the end), we plot the CDF of how
much time our sockpuppet accounts spend on each video to
capture the explanations (see Figure 4(b)). We observe that
1115


===== PAGE 7 =====

101 102 103 104 105 106 107
#Likes
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
CDF
with
liked
without
liked
100
101
102
103
104
105
106
#Shares
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
CDF
with
shared
without
shared
100
101
102
103
104
105
106
#Comments
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
CDF
with
commented
without
commented
Figure 3: Comparison of video metadata for videos with/without an explanation for the No-Engagement (NE) conﬁguration.
for 92% of the videos, our sockpuppet accounts spent 15
seconds or less on them, with a maximum value of 32 sec-
onds. This indicates that our sockpuppet accounts did not
watch till the end any of the “long” videos (i.e., 45 sec-
onds or more), which likely indicates that the explanation
is solely provided because the video has a long duration, ir-
respective of how long the user watched previous so-called
“long” videos, which is a proxy to identify if a user likes the
content.
3.3
Main Take-Aways
The main take-away points from our analysis aiming to char-
acterize video explanations are:
• A large percentage of videos (more than 40%) received
engagement-based explanations when the sockpuppet ac-
counts did not engage with any video.
• We ﬁnd that the Popular explanation is provided to al-
most all the videos that receive explanations on TikTok
(over 98% across all our sockpuppet accounts).
• TikTok fails to provide explanations to 8.69% of all the
video recommendations.
• The use of engagement-based explanations is likely in-
ﬂuenced by the overall engagement that videos received
on the entire TikTok platform. For instance, we ﬁnd
that videos with the Liked explanation have signiﬁcantly
more likes than videos without the Liked explanation.
• The TikTok explanations are written in a way that
suggests they are personalized based on the activ-
ity/engagement of a user, however, our analysis indicates
that explanations are applied in a non-personalized way
(i.e., explanations are likely added due to the overall
video engagement/characteristics, irrespective of users’
activity/engagement).
4
RQ2: Accuracy and Comprehensiveness of
Video Explanations
Thus far, our analysis shows that some explanations are pro-
vided to videos in a way that does not consider user behav-
ior. Motivated by these preliminary ﬁndings, in this section,
we take a deep dive into understanding two key aspects of
video explanations, namely Accuracy and Comprehensive-
ness. To do this, we create connections between the user be-
havior/video characteristics and the respective explanations,
101
102
Video Duration (s)
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
CDF
with
longer
without
longer
5
10
15
20
25
30
View Duration (s)
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
CDF
Figure 4: CDF of (a) video durations for videos with/without
the Longer explanation and (b) the sockpuppet accounts’
view duration for each video.
hence labeling the videos with TikTok explanations. For ac-
curacy, we model the problem as a binary classiﬁcation task
and measure the number of false positives and false nega-
tives generated between our labeling and TikTok-provided
explanations. For comprehensiveness, we compare the set
of our labeled explanations and those provided by TikTok
to assess if TikTok provides all the applicable explanations
on videos. Below, we describe our methodology for opera-
tionalizing these aspects and our ﬁndings.
4.1
Methodology and Data Preprocessing
Labeling Methodology. To assess the accuracy and com-
prehensiveness of video explanations, we need to label the
videos with all feasible explanations based on user behavior
and video characteristics. By doing so, we generate a ground
truth dataset of explanations, which we will later compare
with the TikTok-provided explanations to assess the accu-
1116


===== PAGE 8 =====

racy and comprehensiveness of the explanations. Our label-
ing approach relies on the results presented in Section 3.2
with some additional assumptions on what constitutes “sim-
ilar videos,” which is a phrase commonly used in TikTok
explanations (see Table 2). Our labeling approach works
by iterating over the videos chronologically and assign-
ing all possible explanations to each video based on some
pre-determined conditions for the engagement-based and
content-based explanations. We expand over these under-
lying “assumptions” and “pre-determined conditions” that
were used in our labeling process in the paragraphs.
The
four
Engagement-based
explanations,
namely
Shared, Liked, Watched, and Commented, express the
“similarity” between videos as a possible reason for a
video being recommended. Therefore, we need to measure
the similarity between the videos so that our explanation
labeling approach can assign these four explanations to
the videos. To measure the similarity between videos, we
consider their hashtags, sounds, and content creators; we
assume two videos are similar if they share at least one
common hashtag, or have the same sound, or are created
by the same content creator. We do not provide any of
these four explanations in cases where videos do not have
hashtags or a sound. Given this notion of video similarity,
we assign these four explanations to a video taking into
account the account’s engagements with previous videos
on its feed. Particularly, a video gets the Shared, Liked, or
Commented explanations if there exists a similar video on
its feed that was previously shared, liked, or commented
on. As for the Watched explanation, we consider a video
as watched if the account watched it for at least the full
duration of the video. For the Following explanation, we
check if a video’s content creator was already followed.
For the Content-based explanations, our labeling ap-
proach relies solely on video characteristics. For the Longer
explanation, we consider a video to be long if its duration
is at least 45 seconds; we select this threshold based on the
analysis in Section 3.2 (see Figure 4(a)), as we aim to have
a labeling approach that is as much as possible inline with
how TikTok adds explanations. Similarly, for the Popular
explanation, we assign the explanation if a video has at least
100K views (see Figure 2(a)). Finally, for the Recently ex-
planation, our dataset contains only two videos with this ex-
planation. These instances have a time difference between
the video view and upload item of 81K and 77K seconds.
Since we lack sufﬁcient data to draw conclusions as to what
constitutes a “recent” video, we refrain from providing the
Recently explanation to the videos.
Preprocessing the Dataset. One of the features used to as-
sess video similarity is the set of hashtags provided by the
video creator in the video description. On TikTok, many
content creators include various generic and popular hash-
tags to inﬂuence the recommendation system and increase
the probability of the video appearing in other users’ “For
You” feed (Klug et al. 2021). For example, such generic
and popular hashtags are #foryoupage, #fyp (an acronym
for “For You Page”), #foryou, and #viral. The existence of
these hashtags is affecting our similarity approach; i.e., if
all videos have the #fyp hashtag, then our labeling approach
Explanation
FP
FN
TP
TN
NA
Shared
0.12
0.00
0.10
0.68
0.10
Commented
0.14
0.00
0.00
0.86
0.00
Liked
0.17
0.01
0.08
0.65
0.09
Following
0.00
0.00
0.01
0.99
0.00
Watched
0.02
0.45
0.08
0.17
0.28
Longer
0.00
0.00
0.02
0.98
0.00
Popular
0.01
0.07
0.90
0.02
0.00
Table 5: Accuracy metrics for each explanation provided by
TikTok. We report the False Positive rate (FP), the False
Negative rate (FN), the True Positive rate (TP), and the
True Negative rate (TN). NA refers to the fraction of videos
for which we cannot assess their similarity (videos with no
hashtags or sound). Note that as discussed in Section 4.1,
we do not consider the Recently explanation in our accuracy
analysis.
will consider all videos as similar to each other. Therefore,
we preprocess our dataset and remove all generic hashtags
from the video descriptions. To do this, we consider the
hashtags that appear in at least 0.1% of the videos, corre-
sponding to the top 470 hashtags in our dataset. Next, we re-
view these hashtags systematically and remove the general
and meaningless ones. These removed hashtags are gener-
ally different variations of writing the #foryoupage or #viral
hashtags.
Validating the Labeling Methodology. Our labeling
methodology makes some assumptions about what consti-
tutes similar videos, and we do not know how accurate our
similarity labels are. To assess how accurate our method-
ology is concerning labeling similar videos, we perform a
manual validation. We extract a random sample of 100 video
pairs: 50 video pairs labeled as similar and 50 video pairs
labeled as dissimilar. Then, three researchers independently
annotated the video pairs to assess whether they were sim-
ilar. Given that TikTok does not provide a notion of simi-
larity, we asked the annotators to label the videos as similar
or dissimilar without providing a deﬁnition of similarity. We
ﬁnd a Fleiss’ Kappa score of 0.825, which indicates an al-
most perfect inter-annotator agreement between the three re-
searchers (Fleiss 1971). In the end, we label the 100 videos
in our sample based on the majority agreement of the la-
bels and calculate standard classiﬁcation metrics to assess
the performance of the labeling methodology. We observe
that our similarity labels have an accuracy, precision, recall,
and F1 score of 0.84, 0.78, 0.88, and 0.82, respectively. We
believe that for the purposes of this study, this performance
is acceptable.
4.2
Results
Here we present our results on the accuracy and comprehen-
siveness of TikTok explanations.
Accuracy. By considering the provision of an explanation to
a video as a binary classiﬁcation task, we can assess its ac-
curacy by measuring the True Positive (TP), True Negative
(TN), False Positive (FP), and False Negative (FN) metrics.
1117


===== PAGE 9 =====

0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Jaccard index
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
CDF
Figure 5: CDF of the Jaccard index between the explanations
generated by our methodology and TikTok explanations.
Here, we treat the explanations provided by TikTok as pre-
dictions and the explanations provided by our labeling ap-
proach as ground truth labels. As noted in Section 4.1, for
the explanations that require assessing video similarity, we
are unable to assess the similarity for videos without hash-
tags or sound, hence, we put them in the Not Available (NA)
category.
Table 5 shows the aggregate accuracy metrics of each ex-
planation across all account conﬁgurations. The Shared ex-
planation has a FP rate of 0.12, FN of 0.0, TP of 0.10, TN
of 0.68, and NA of 0.10. Therefore, we see a moderate to-
tal error rate of 0.12 and a high accuracy of 0.78. For the
Commented explanation, we ﬁnd a FP of 0.14 and TN of
0.86. The rest of the metrics are 0. As no account engaged
with TikTok by writing comments on the videos, any oc-
currence of the Commented explanation would be a False
Positive instance. Hence, these results are indeed in accor-
dance with our experimental setup. Our ﬁndings show a FP
rate of 0.17, FN of 0.01, TP of 0.08, TN of 0.65, and NA of
0.09 for the Liked explanation. With a moderate total error
rate of 0.18 and an accuracy rate of 0.73, we note that Tik-
Tok’s recommendation system acts quite similarly in terms
of accuracy for both the Liked and Shared explanations. We
ﬁnd a 0.01 rate of TP and a 0.99 rate of TN for the Follow-
ing explanation, while the other metrics are 0. Our results
show that this explanation is one of the most accurate expla-
nations provided by TikTok. For the Watched explanation,
we observe a FP rate of 0.02, FN of 0.45, TP of 0.08, TN of
0.17, and NA of 0.28. Our ﬁndings show that with an error
rate of 0.47, the Watched explanation is the most inaccurate
among all seven explanations. The Longer explanation has
a TP rate of 0.02, a TN of 0.98, and the rest of the metrics
are at 0. Similar to the Following explanation, our results in-
dicate that this explanation, while being almost error-free, is
also one of the most accurate explanations provided by Tik-
Tok. Lastly, for the Popular explanation, we see a FP rate of
0.01, FN of 0.07, TP of 0.9, TN of 0.02, and NA of 0. With
an error rate of 0.08, this explanation is also among the most
accurate explanations provided by TikTok.
Comprehensiveness. By treating the explanations provided
by TikTok and our labeling explanations for a video as two
sets, we can assess the comprehensiveness of the provided
explanations by measuring the Jaccard index of these two
sets. Figure 5 shows the CDF of the Jaccard index for all the
videos in our dataset. We observe that in 9% of the videos,
we have a Jaccard index of 0, implying a complete disagree-
ment between the set of explanations provided by TikTok
and our labeled explanations. Moreover, in 9% of the videos,
we have a Jaccard index of 1, indicating full agreement be-
tween the set of explanations provided by TikTok and our
explanation generation system. Also, we see that in 69% of
the videos, the computed Jaccard index is at least 0.5, sug-
gesting that a fair amount of comprehensiveness exists in
the explanations provided by TikTok. Overall, these results
suggest that for some videos, there are possible explanations
that are not provided by TikTok, which highlights the need
for more comprehensive transparency.
4.3
Main Take-Aways
The main take-away points from our analysis to assess the
accuracy and comprehensiveness of video explanations are:
• Our accuracy assessment analysis shows that overall, the
explanations Following and Longer are the most accu-
rate explanations provided by TikTok’s recommendation
system. Followed by these, the Popular and Commented
explanations, with error rates of 0.08 and 0.14, respec-
tively, obtain the highest accuracies among the remain-
ing explanations. On the other hand, the Shared, Liked,
and Watched explanations have lower accuracies, with
the Watched being the least accurate explanation with
an error rate of 0.47, and Liked and Shared explanations
having error rates of 0.18 and 0.12, respectively.
• Our comprehensiveness analysis shows that TikTok does
not provide all the possible explanations for video recom-
mendations. We ﬁnd that for only 9% of the video rec-
ommendations, we had the same explanations provided
by TikTok and our labeling approach.
5
Related Work
This section describes previous efforts to understand content
explanations and auditing recommendation systems.
Explanations for Social Media Content. The prior work
on the explanations provided by social media platforms as
to why content is being suggested to the users is mainly
focused on the explanations of the advertisements. This
is because, until recently, mainstream social media plat-
forms had not incorporated the feature of providing ex-
planations for normal content other than advertisements.
As a groundbreaking step towards transparency and ex-
plainability of the contents shown on users’ feeds, the gi-
ant social media platforms started providing explanations
for advertisements, shedding light as to why certain ads
are shown to the users (Meta 2023; Google 2023a; Corp.
2023). Back in 2018, in a seminal piece of work, Andreou
et al. (Andreou et al. 2018) performed the ﬁrst empiri-
cal study of explanations in social media advertising and
showed that in the case of Facebook, the provided ad ex-
planations are usually incomplete and even sometimes mis-
leading. With the increasing number of machine learning ap-
plications, algorithmically-based recommendation systems
1118


===== PAGE 10 =====

are also emerging. Prior work has stated the importance of
deﬁning and evaluating interpretability, transparency, and
accountability of these machine learning systems (Lipton
2018; Doshi-Velez and Kim 2017; Wieringa 2020; Weller
2017). On the other hand, with the advent of these ma-
chine learning models and their prevailing acceptance by
society, the concept of trust in these systems, from the per-
spective of the users, is becoming more critical. Some previ-
ous work indicates that providing explanations and adopting
transparency would increase public trust in a platform (Lip-
ton 2018; Ribeiro, Singh, and Guestrin 2016). Despite this,
Weller (Weller 2017) argues that platforms may be able
to trick their users into having trust in their systems by
providing useless explanations. On the other hand, Kizil-
cec (Kizilcec 2016) shows that providing either too little
or too much transparency to the users erodes their trust in
the systems. Therefore, platforms require balanced interface
transparency, not too little and not too much, when aim-
ing to maximize the users’ trust. Consequently, ﬁnding this
balanced sweet spot is a challenging task. In work towards
this direction focused on ad explanations, researchers found
that the users preferred interpretable and non-creepy expla-
nations, as well as a recognizable link to their identity as to
why an ad is shown to them (Eslami et al. 2018).
Recommendation Systems Auditing. With the increasing
advancement and utilization of machine learning systems,
user feeds on social media platforms have started serv-
ing content that is suggested by the recommendation algo-
rithms (TikTok 2020). Therefore, the importance of these
recommendation systems and their effects on humans are
growing over time (Sandvig et al. 2014; Bandy 2021). On
the other hand, providing detailed explanations on how these
neural network-based systems work has been a challeng-
ing task (Mitchell et al. 2007; Goodfellow, Bengio, and
Courville 2016). Hence, to better understand how these
artiﬁcially intelligent recommendation systems work, we
need to conduct audits (European Commission 2023). Re-
searchers have already shown that algorithm audits can re-
veal controversial and problematic behaviors of recommen-
dation systems. For instance, recommendation systems may
trap their users in ﬁlter bubbles (WSJ Staff 2021), provide
them with extreme contents (Ribeiro et al. 2020), or preserve
biases (Baeza-Yates 2020). To audit the video explanations
provided by TikTok platform, we created fake user proﬁles
and developed an automated bot that engages with the videos
on their “For You” feeds. According to the characterization
of audit study designs by (Sandvig et al. 2014), our approach
belongs to the sockpuppet audit category. There have been
multiple pieces of work that are based on sockpuppet au-
dits. For instance, an investigation on TikTok’s recommen-
dation system based on sockpuppet audits showed that Tik-
Tok may be able to quickly ﬁgure out the bot’s interests, or
push the bot’s feed towards a rabbit hole of sad videos (WSJ
Staff 2021). In another work, Boeker and Urman empirically
investigated various personalization factors on the TikTok
platform using a sockpuppet audit methodology (Boeker and
Urman 2022).
Remarks. In contrast to previous work, we focus on audit-
ing video explanations of non-advertisement content on Tik-
Tok. To the best of our knowledge, we perform the ﬁrst sys-
tematic audit of explanations provided by social media plat-
forms on online content recommended by algorithms and
not sponsored/paid. We believe that our work paves the way
toward auditing transparency efforts by very large social me-
dia platforms like TikTok, by characterizing these explana-
tions and assessing their accuracy and comprehensiveness.
6
Ethical Considerations and Broader
Impact
In this section, we discuss our ethical considerations when
conducting this research and the FAIR principles for releas-
ing our dataset. Our study focuses exclusively on collect-
ing publicly available information on the TikTok platform
using sockpuppet accounts, hence we are not dealing with
any sensitive user data. Our sockpuppet accounts performed
some actions on TikTok (i.e., like videos and randomly fol-
low some creators), however, since we only used 45 sock-
puppet accounts in total, we do not anticipate that any user
harm will arise from these actions. At the same time, we
carefully designed our sockpuppet accounts to not incur a
substantial overhead to the TikTok platform (e.g., by adding
delays between sessions), which might harm the user expe-
rience of other TikTok users browsing the platform or cause
any disruption to the platform. Overall, even though Tik-
Tok’s Terms of Service (ToS) prohibits any data or content
extraction from the platform using any automated system or
software that is not provided by TikTok or approved in writ-
ing by TikTok (TikTok 2023), we believe that the beneﬁts
of our systematic audit and analysis outweigh the potential
harms arising from our data collection and interaction with
the TikTok platform.
We plan to make our dataset publicly available following
the FAIR principles (Wilkinson et al. 2016). The dataset will
be available on a prominent cloud storage service, making
it ﬁndable and accessible. The dataset will be interopera-
ble in that it will be released in a Python-readable format.
Moreover, our dataset is reusable as besides clearly stating
the steps taken to collect the dataset, we plan to release a
README ﬁle that explains correct data usage.
7
Discussion & Conclusion
In this work, we performed a large-scale audit of explana-
tions provided on TikTok video recommendations. Using
45 sockpuppet accounts, we collected 69K video views and
128K explanations. We plan to make the code and collected
dataset publicly available, which we believe is an essen-
tial step towards more algorithmic audits and understand-
ing these transparency efforts. Then, we analyzed the col-
lected dataset to understand the various video explanations
and how they are applied on TikTok. Also, we assessed the
accuracy and comprehensiveness of these explanations on
TikTok. Our characterization shows that TikTok applies sev-
eral Engagement-based and Content-based explanations on
each video recommendation, with almost 90% of the videos
including two video explanations. Also, we ﬁnd that some
explanations, e.g., the Popular explanation, are provided in
1119


===== PAGE 11 =====

almost all the videos (more than 98% of the videos with
explanations). More worrying is the ﬁnding that some ex-
planations are written in a personalized manner, but they
are applied in a non-personalized manner; e.g., we ﬁnd that
34% of the videos include the Commented explanation when
our sockpuppet account made zero comments on TikTok.
Finally, our accuracy analysis indicates that TikTok expla-
nations have varying accuracies, with content-based expla-
nations being more accurate than engagement-based expla-
nations. Concerning comprehensiveness, we ﬁnd for most of
the videos (91%), TikTok does not provide all feasible expla-
nations. Below, we discuss the implications of these ﬁndings
and the limitations of this work.
Explanation Utility. Our work emphasizes the need for fur-
ther studies to investigate the utility of video explanations.
We observed that explanations are sometimes added with-
out considering the user behavior and that some explanations
appear in almost all the videos. These two factors affect the
utility of the explanations for end-users. For instance, end-
users will likely ignore explanations that are presented in all
videos, as they are not informative, while the fact that ex-
planations are added without considering the user behavior
may cause end users not to trust the provided explanations
(i.e., the perceived explanation accuracy will diminish).
Explanation Personalization & Phrasing. Our character-
ization shows that most explanations are written and pre-
sented in a way that they are personalized, however, our
analysis shows that they are applied in a non-personalized
way. This highlights the need for greater transparency by so-
cial media platforms, particularly explaining to users which
explanations pertain to their user engagement/behavior and
which explanations are not. We argue that it is important that
social media platforms design more ﬁne-grained explana-
tions that will give users enough context to understand why
they are getting recommended certain videos.
Regulation Compliance. DSA’s recital 70 mentions that on-
line platforms “should include at least the most important
criteria in determining the information suggested to the re-
cipient of the service and the reasons for their respective im-
portance, including where information is prioritised based
on proﬁling and their online behaviour” (European Commis-
sion 2023). Based on our analysis and ﬁndings, we can con-
clude that TikTok’s transparency efforts are not fully compli-
ant with the DSA regulation, given that most of the provided
explanations are generic and there is no explanation of the
importance of the factors that affect the recommendations.
Taken all together, there is a need for collaboration between
social media platforms, regulators, and end-users to ensure
that the social media platforms are providing explanations
that are compliant with the regulations and that end-users
can comprehend why they are getting recommended speciﬁc
content online easily.
Potential Sources of Bias. Our analysis and ﬁndings
demonstrate that TikTok video explanations on regular
videos are very generic and high-level. Therefore, it is highly
unlikely that these explanations can be used to analyze po-
tential sources of bias. For instance, whether TikTok uses
explanations in a speciﬁc way in order to ﬁt some politi-
cal agenda. Nevertheless, some of our preliminary investi-
gations on explanations in advertisement videos show that
those explanations are more ﬁne-grained and speciﬁc. For
instance, we ﬁnd explanations like “TikTok’s estimate of
your interest in News & Entertainment or a similar category”
or “TikTok’s estimate of your interest in Sports & Outdoors
or a similar category.” This indicates that TikTok has more
information on the users, which is not provided in the expla-
nations on regular videos. We believe that in the future, a po-
tential research direction is analyzing the potential sources
of bias by looking into explanations provided on both regu-
lar and advertisement videos.
Limitations. Our work has some limitations. First, our data
collection is limited to a single platform (i.e., TikTok) and it
is done for a short time period (3 months). These limitations
do not allow us to study the use of video explanations across
multiple platforms, or how the time dimension may affect
the provided video explanations. We leave all these research
endeavors as part of our future work. Second, our accuracy
and comprehensiveness analysis relies on our labeling ap-
proach that assesses the similarity of videos using hashtags,
sounds, and video creators. Based on the user annotation re-
sults for validating our labeling approach, we think that these
features are a good proxy for content similarity, however,
our approach is limited because even though the features we
use can be potential indicators of video similarity, we do
not consider the complex nature of video content. Despite
these important limitations, we believe that our work is an
important step towards understanding the application and ef-
fectiveness of these algorithmic transparency efforts by very
large social media platforms like TikTok.
Future Work. Our work creates avenues for future work.
Future work can explore the causal relationships between
the quality and personalization of explanations and user be-
havior, trust, and content engagement. Also, future work can
investigate differences in video explanations across various
demographics, as well as investigate ways to study biases
that may arise from the use of video explanations by plat-
forms like TikTok.
References
Andreou, A.; Venkatadri, G.; Goga, O.; Gummadi, K. P.;
Loiseau, P.; and Mislove, A. 2018. Investigating ad trans-
parency mechanisms in social media: A case study of Face-
book’s explanations. In NDSS, 1–15.
Baeza-Yates, R. 2020. Bias in search and recommender sys-
tems. In Proceedings of the 14th ACM Conference on Rec-
ommender Systems, 2–2.
Bandy, J. 2021. Problematic machine behavior: A system-
atic literature review of algorithm audits. CSCW, 5: 1–34.
Boeker, M.; and Urman, A. 2022. An Empirical Investiga-
tion of Personalization Factors on TikTok. In Proceedings
of the ACM Web Conference 2022, 2298–2309.
Commision, E. 2016.
General Data Protection Regula-
tion.
https://eur-lex.europa.eu/eli/reg/2016/679/oj.
Ac-
cessed: 2023-05-20.
1120


===== PAGE 12 =====

Corp., X. 2023.
Why are you seeing this ad .
https://
help.twitter.com/en/why-are-you-seeing-this-ad. Accessed:
2023-05-20.
Developers, A. 2023. Android Debug Bridge (adb). https:
//developer.android.com/tools/adb. Accessed: 2023-05-20.
Doshi-Velez, F.; and Kim, B. 2017.
Towards a rigorous
science of interpretable machine learning. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1702.08608.
Eslami, M.; Krishna Kumaran, S. R.; Sandvig, C.; and Kara-
halios, K. 2018. Communicating algorithmic process in on-
line behavioral advertising. In CHI, 1–13.
European Commission. 2023.
The Digital Services Act
package.
https://digital-strategy.ec.europa.eu/en/policies/
digital-services-act-package. Accessed: 2023-05-20.
Fleiss, J. L. 1971.
Measuring nominal scale agreement
among many raters. Psychological bulletin, 76(5): 378.
FORCE11. 2020. The FAIR Data principles. https://force11.
org/info/the-fair-data-principles/. Accessed: 2023-09-10.
Gebru, T.; Morgenstern, J.; Vecchione, B.; Vaughan, J. W.;
Wallach, H.; Iii, H. D.; and Crawford, K. 2021. Datasheets
for datasets. Communications of the ACM, 64(12): 86–92.
Gkiouzepi, E.; Andreou, A.; Goga, O.; and Loiseau, P. 2023.
Collaborative Ad Transparency: Promises and Limitations.
In 44th IEEE Symposium on Security and Privacy.
Goodfellow, I.; Bengio, Y.; and Courville, A. 2016. Deep
learning. MIT press.
Google. 2023a. Control the ads you see when you see them
.
https://support.google.com/My-Ad-Center-Help/answer/
12155764. Accessed: 2023-05-20.
Google. 2023b.
Python Wrapper for Google’s Tesseract
OCR Engine.
https://pypi.org/project/pytesseract/.
Ac-
cessed: 2023-05-20.
Kizilcec, R. F. 2016.
How much information? Effects of
transparency on trust in an algorithmic interface. In CHI,
2390–2395.
Klug, D.; Qin, Y.; Evans, M.; and Kaufman, G. 2021. Trick
and please. A mixed-method study on user assumptions
about the TikTok algorithm. In 13th ACM Web Science Con-
ference 2021, 84–92.
Ledwich, M.; and Zaitsev, A. 2019. Algorithmic extremism:
Examining YouTube’s rabbit hole of radicalization. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1912.11211.
Lee, H.-P.; Logas, J.; Yang, S.; Li, Z.; Barbosa, N.; Wang, Y.;
and Das, S. 2022. When and Why Do People Want Ad Tar-
geting Explanations? Evidence from a Four-Week, Mixed-
Methods Field Study. In 2023 IEEE Symposium on Security
and Privacy (SP), 923–940.
Lipton, Z. C. 2018. The mythos of model interpretability:
In machine learning, the concept of interpretability is both
important and slippery. Queue, 16(3): 31–57.
Meta. 2023. How does Facebook decide which ads to show
me? .
https://www.facebook.com/help/562973647153813.
Accessed: 2023-05-20.
Mitchell, T. M.; et al. 2007. Machine learning, volume 1.
McGraw-hill New York.
OpenCV. 2023. OpenCV Python Library. https://pypi.org/
project/opencv-python/. Accessed: 2023-05-20.
Ribeiro, M. H.; Ottoni, R.; West, R.; Almeida, V. A.; and
Meira Jr, W. 2020.
Auditing radicalization pathways on
YouTube. In Proceedings of the 2020 conference on fair-
ness, accountability, and transparency, 131–141.
Ribeiro, M. T.; Singh, S.; and Guestrin, C. 2016. ” Why
should i trust you?” Explaining the predictions of any clas-
siﬁer. In SIGKDD, 1135–1144.
Sandvig, C.; Hamilton, K.; Karahalios, K.; and Langbort, C.
2014. Auditing algorithms: Research methods for detecting
discrimination on internet platforms. Data and discrimina-
tion: converting critical concerns into productive inquiry.
Teather, D. 2022. Unofﬁcial TikTok API in Python. https:
//github.com/davidteather/TikTok-Api. Accessed: 2023-05-
20.
TikTok.
2020.
How
TikTok
recommends
videos
#ForYou.
https://newsroom.tiktok.com/en-us/how-tiktok-
recommends-videos-for-you. Accessed: 2023-05-20.
TikTok. 2022.
Learn why a video is recommended
For You. https://newsroom.tiktok.com/en-us/learn-why-a-
video-is-recommended-for-you. Accessed: 2023-05-20.
TikTok. 2023. TikTok Terms of Service. https://www.tiktok.
com/legal/page/eea/terms-of-service/en#terms-eea.
Ac-
cessed: 2024-01-10.
Tufekci, Z. 2018. YouTube, the great radicalizer. The New
York Times, 10(3): 2018.
Wei, M.; Stamos, M.; Veys, S.; Reitinger, N.; Goodman, J.;
Herman, M.; Filipczuk, D.; Weinshel, B.; Mazurek, M. L.;
and Ur, B. 2020.
What twitter knows: characterizing ad
targeting practices, user perceptions, and ad explanations
through users’ own twitter data. In USENIX Security, 145–
162.
Weller, A. 2017. Challenges for transparency.
Wieringa, M. 2020. What to account for when accounting
for algorithms: a systematic literature review on algorithmic
accountability. In ACM FAccT, 1–18.
Wilkinson, D.; Namara, M.; Patil, K.; Guo, L.; Manda, A.;
and Knijnenburg, B. P. 2021. The Pursuit of Transparency
and Control: A Classiﬁcation of Ad Explanations in Social
Media. In Hawaii International Conference on System Sci-
ences.
Wilkinson, M. D.; Dumontier, M.; Aalbersberg, I. J.; Apple-
ton, G.; Axton, M.; Baak, A.; Blomberg, N.; Boiten, J.-W.;
da Silva Santos, L. B.; Bourne, P. E.; et al. 2016. The FAIR
Guiding Principles for scientiﬁc data management and stew-
ardship. Scientiﬁc data, 3(1): 1–9.
WSJ Staff. 2021.
Inside TikTok’s Algorithm: A WSJ
Video Investigation.
https://www.wsj.com/articles/tiktok-
algorithm-video-investigation-11626877477.
Accessed:
2023-05-20.
Zannettou, S.; Nemeth, O.-N.; Ayalon, O.; Goetzen, A.;
Gummadi, K. P.; Redmiles, E. M.; and Roesner, F. 2023.
Leveraging Rights of Data Subjects for Social Media Anal-
ysis: Studying TikTok via Data Donations. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2301.04945.
1121


===== PAGE 13 =====

Ethics Checklist
1. For most authors...
(a) Would answering this research question advance sci-
ence without violating social contracts, such as violat-
ing privacy norms, perpetuating unfair proﬁling, exac-
erbating the socio-economic divide, or implying disre-
spect to societies or cultures? Yes, see Section 6.
(b) Do your main claims in the abstract and introduction
accurately reﬂect the paper’s contributions and scope?
Yes, see Sections 3 and 4.
(c) Do you clarify how the proposed methodological ap-
proach is appropriate for the claims made? Yes, see
Section 4.1.
(d) Do you clarify what are possible artifacts in the data
used, given population-speciﬁc distributions? Yes, we
listed the data limitations in Section 7. With respect
to population-speciﬁc distributions, we cannot make
any claims about the representativeness of our dataset,
given that we perform a sockpuppet-based audit.
(e) Did you describe the limitations of your work? Yes,
see Section 7.
(f) Did you discuss any potential negative societal im-
pacts of your work? Yes, see Section 6.
(g) Did you discuss any potential misuse of your work?
No, as we do not anticipate any potential misuse of
this work.
(h) Did you describe steps taken to prevent or mitigate po-
tential negative outcomes of the research, such as data
and model documentation, data anonymization, re-
sponsible release, access control, and the reproducibil-
ity of ﬁndings? Yes, see Section 6 and our datasheet in
the Supplementary Information.
(i) Have you read the ethics review guidelines and en-
sured that your paper conforms to them? Yes
2. Additionally, if your study involves hypotheses testing...
(a) Did you clearly state the assumptions underlying all
theoretical results? NA
(b) Have you provided justiﬁcations for all theoretical re-
sults? NA
(c) Did you discuss competing hypotheses or theories that
might challenge or complement your theoretical re-
sults? NA
(d) Have you considered alternative mechanisms or expla-
nations that might account for the same outcomes ob-
served in your study? NA
(e) Did you address potential biases or limitations in your
theoretical framework? NA
(f) Have you related your theoretical results to the existing
literature in social science? NA
(g) Did you discuss the implications of your theoretical
results for policy, practice, or further research in the
social science domain? NA
3. Additionally, if you are including theoretical proofs...
(a) Did you state the full set of assumptions of all theoret-
ical results? NA
(b) Did you include complete proofs of all theoretical re-
sults? NA
4. Additionally, if you ran machine learning experiments...
(a) Did you include the code, data, and instructions
needed to reproduce the main experimental results (ei-
ther in the supplemental material or as a URL)? NA
(b) Did you specify all the training details (e.g., data splits,
hyperparameters, how they were chosen)? NA
(c) Did you report error bars (e.g., with respect to the ran-
dom seed after running experiments multiple times)?
NA
(d) Did you include the total amount of compute and the
type of resources used (e.g., type of GPUs, internal
cluster, or cloud provider)? NA
(e) Do you justify how the proposed evaluation is sufﬁ-
cient and appropriate to the claims made? NA
(f) Do you discuss what is “the cost“ of misclassiﬁcation
and fault (in)tolerance? NA
5. Additionally, if you are using existing assets (e.g., code,
data, models) or curating/releasing new assets, without
compromising anonymity...
(a) If your work uses existing assets, did you cite the cre-
ators? NA
(b) Did you mention the license of the assets? NA
(c) Did you include any new assets in the supplemental
material or as a URL? Yes, see the footnote in Sec-
tion 1.
(d) Did you discuss whether and how consent was ob-
tained from people whose data you’re using/curating?
NA
(e) Did you discuss whether the data you are us-
ing/curating contains personally identiﬁable informa-
tion or offensive content? No, as our dataset does not
contain personally identiﬁable information or offen-
sive content.
(f) If you are curating or releasing new datasets, did you
discuss how you intend to make your datasets FAIR
(see FORCE11 (2020))? Yes, see Section 6.
(g) If you are curating or releasing new datasets, did you
create a Datasheet for the Dataset (see Gebru et al.
(2021))? Yes. We attach the datasheet as a separate
document in Supplementary Information.
6. Additionally, if you used crowdsourcing or conducted
research with human subjects, without compromising
anonymity...
(a) Did you include the full text of instructions given to
participants and screenshots? NA
(b) Did you describe any potential participant risks, with
mentions of Institutional Review Board (IRB) ap-
provals? NA
(c) Did you include the estimated hourly wage paid to
participants and the total amount spent on participant
compensation? NA
(d) Did you discuss how data is stored, shared, and dei-
dentiﬁed? NA
1122
